[Amit Varma]: At the start of April 2000, I wrote an article in the Times of India that argued that we
[Amit Varma]: were fighting two disasters. One, of course, was the immediate problem of COVID-19. The
[Amit Varma]: other was the hidden problem of the dysfunctional Indian state. COVID-19 would eventually recede,
[Amit Varma]: and indeed one hopes the worst is behind us now. But the Indian state remains, and the
[Amit Varma]: damage it causes is normalized every day. Before COVID struck us, it was estimated that
[Amit Varma]: around 3,000 children die every day in India of starvation. One in four Indian children
[Amit Varma]: are malnourished. We would have to be blind not to see the poor all around us, often lacking
[Amit Varma]: livelihood and homes, these 75 years after independence. If any of this had been caused
[Amit Varma]: by a natural disaster, the world would rush to help. The UN would declare an emergency.
[Amit Varma]: There would be headlines about it every day. But we've normalized, and it took the disaster
[Amit Varma]: of COVID to reveal to many of us again the greater disaster of the flailing Indian state.
[Amit Varma]: Now another potential disaster awaits us down the road. Climate change. We must do something
[Amit Varma]: about it before it is too late and the cost is unbearable. But our dysfunctional state
[Amit Varma]: stands in the way. A problem like climate change cannot be tackled by central planning
[Amit Varma]: and rent-seeking bureaucracies. We need to fix these problems of the state first. Can
[Unknown]: we do that?
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen. My guests today are Akshay Jaitley and Ajay Shah. Akshay
[Amit Varma]: is one of the founders of the law firm Trilegal, and he now lives in Paris, where he is more
[Amit Varma]: or less retired from the law, but still working hard on problems he has deep experience in,
[Amit Varma]: such as our energy sector. Ajay has been a guest on the show many times, and I know he's
[Amit Varma]: the listener favorite for his incredibly lucid insights. A few months ago, Akshay and Ajay,
[Amit Varma]: thinking together about climate change, released a superb paper named The Lowest Hanging Fruit
[Amit Varma]: in the Coconut Tree – India's Climate Transition through the Price System in the
[Amit Varma]: Power Sector. I've linked it from the show notes. The paper describes how fighting climate
[Amit Varma]: change and reducing carbon emissions is achievable, but only if we reform the power sector, get
[Amit Varma]: the incentives right, and society and markets will act in ways that move us towards a cleaner
[Amit Varma]: and safer world. How is this to be achieved? What are the problems we face today, and how
[Amit Varma]: can we solve them? Akshay and Ajay joined me to chat about their paper and much more.
[Amit Varma]: Now, Ajay has been a frequent guest, so we spent the first half of this episode exploring
[Amit Varma]: Akshay's formative years, and from after the first break, around the 1 hour 55 minute
[Amit Varma]: mark, we got down to talking about this great paper of theirs. I loved every minute of this
[Amit Varma]: entire conversation, and Akshay and Ajay gave me a lot to think about. Before we get to
[Amit Varma]: that though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: All around us we hear about unicorns, and many of these unicorns create notional value
[Amit Varma]: in the world of bits and bytes. But the sponsor of today's episode is a giant company that
[Amit Varma]: creates real value in the world of atoms. KNEST is an aluminium formwork company that
[Amit Varma]: was founded in 2014 and is today India's largest and the world's largest growing formwork
[Amit Varma]: company. Now, what is formwork? It's a building technology that makes construction
[Amit Varma]: more efficient, sustainable and scalable. Until recently, Indian real estate had to
[Amit Varma]: outsource this tech to foreign companies at crazy prices. KNEST changed the game with
[Amit Varma]: their state of the art automated unit and the largest design team in the industry that
[Amit Varma]: uses virtual reality to make their customised aluminium products. They've had a massive
[Amit Varma]: impact that is unseen in two ways. One, of course, they make the building they are used
[Amit Varma]: for sturdier and more reliable. Two, they've brought value to the entire industry and not
[Amit Varma]: just the industry but also the environment as projects that use KNEST use less wood and
[Amit Varma]: are friendlier to the natural world around them. KNEST shows that not only is sustainable
[Amit Varma]: development possible in these urbanising times, but also that India can show the way in how
[Amit Varma]: it's done. Their slogan goes, desh mein bana, desh ka apna. And companies like this are
[Amit Varma]: the Atmanirbhar India I like. They're already multinational, by the way, building not just
[Amit Varma]: for this country, but for the world. To know more about KNEST, check out knestalueform.com.
[Amit Varma]: The link will be at the bottom of the show notes. Technology, design, innovation, they
[Amit Varma]: all come together in KNEST. Ajay and Akshay, welcome to the scene and the
[Amit Varma]: unseen. Thanks, Amit. Pleasure to be here. Always happy to be here. You know, as I announced
[Amit Varma]: in my introduction, Ajay, you've been a frequent guest on the show, and we've kind of chatted
[Amit Varma]: a lot. So I'd like to get to know Akshay a little better. And we can kind of chat about
[Amit Varma]: his life a little bit right now. But before that, a little bit of trivia for you, Ajay,
[Amit Varma]: that one of my listeners sort of trawled all the data in my show notes and figured out
[Amit Varma]: that the book that I have linked to most often, you know, through the scene and the unseen
[Amit Varma]: is in service of the Republic. So congratulations on that minor victory.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, and I am 100% a victim of the insecure author syndrome. So it means the world to
[Amit Varma]: me that people care about the book. And I also want to start with a story that
[Amit Varma]: a friend of mine tweeted about. This is a gentleman named Narendra Shenoy, who was on
[Amit Varma]: the show in episode 250, fantastic storyteller. So he told a story about how once when he
[Amit Varma]: was a kid, he had to go to a fancy dress party. And this is like early 80s, 70s, whatever.
[Amit Varma]: So everybody at that time, like half the people will dress up as Arab sheiks, because that's
[Amit Varma]: the easiest to dress up as you take a bedsheet or whatever, and you make a hole and you put
[Amit Varma]: it around you. And my friend decided he wants to do something different. And he was a bit
[Amit Varma]: of a science geek at the time. So he took a disc condenser, and he decided to dress
[Amit Varma]: up as a disc condenser. And he gave an image of it basically. And he said, Look, I already
[Amit Varma]: had the spindly legs of a disc condenser. So he made the rest of the sort of costume
[Amit Varma]: of what a disc condenser would look like. And then he went on a stage, and he sang,
[Amit Varma]: I am a disc condenser. This condenser, which is and the reason I thought of you guys, the
[Amit Varma]: reason I thought of this rather while reading your paper is full of discom, discom, discom.
[Amit Varma]: This story immediately came to mind, but kind of moving away from these trivialities. So
[Amit Varma]: Akshay, again, welcome again on the show. And tell me a bit about, you know, your life.
[Amit Varma]: Where did you grow up? What was childhood like?
[Guest 2]: Well, just just before that, I've been I really impressed with the amount of effort to come
[Guest 2]: up with both in visual and an audio pun, really appeals to the cheap humor that I've sort
[Guest 2]: of grown up with. Well, you know, I, I was actually born here in Bombay, but accident
[Guest 2]: of fate, because my father at the time was the deputy commissioner of a small district
[Guest 2]: frontier district called Punch. And this was in 1967, when there was something called the
[Guest 2]: infiltration. And my grandparents lived, coincidentally, both sets of my grandparents lived here, my
[Guest 2]: grandparents on one side, my grandmother on the other. And it was not the nearest hospital
[Guest 2]: in which I could be born, but the one where there was the most support. So I was born
[Guest 2]: here in Bombay. But because my father was in the in government and in the IAS in Kashmir
[Guest 2]: Kader, which was unusual for non state officers at the time, I spent the first 10 years of
[Guest 2]: my life in Kashmir. And in fact, when people say where do you grow up? I say Kashmir, although
[Guest 2]: it was only till the age of 10. But it's more home to me in intellectual, emotional in a
[Guest 2]: variety of different ways than anywhere, anywhere else. So Punch was where I sort of had my
[Guest 2]: first year or two. Then we moved to Jammu as my father was deputy commissioner there.
[Guest 2]: Then we moved to Ladakh. And I was in fact in Leh as a four-year-old during the 71 war.
[Guest 2]: So in fact, my first distinct memories are from then when, which is being in a blacked
[Guest 2]: out room with a Bukhari, generating heat, my mother heating water on the Bukhari, because
[Guest 2]: there was no light, being put into a steel tub and having a bath in the living room.
[Guest 2]: While my father was in Kargil, which was at that time, it was the same district as Ladakh,
[Guest 2]: where he was there with, you know, as the, as the head of the civil administration of
[Guest 2]: the district, he was there with the army on the frontier. So, so it was, you know, I think
[Guest 2]: there'll be many other aspects of my upbringing that will be common to a lot of people. But
[Guest 2]: I think, for me, at least the fact that I grew up in a place like Kashmir, I would like
[Guest 2]: to think and I'm quite sure that it's, there are various aspects of who I am have been
[Guest 2]: dictated by that for multiple reasons, and not just the physical landscape, but also
[Guest 2]: the, you know, the unique history of the place, the unique religious breakdown of the state,
[Guest 2]: etc. So all of those were really important. So I was there till the age of four. Then
[Guest 2]: my father was, was sort of went on study leave to the UK, to Cambridge for a year. So lived
[Guest 2]: abroad between the ages of five and six, at which point I picked up very, very small boys,
[Guest 2]: irrational love for Liverpool Football Club, which remains with me till today, in a very
[Guest 2]: strong sense. It's not just a passing fancy.
[Guest 2]: Around which year was this?
[Guest 2]: This was in 1973. So you're talking about Kevin Keegan, and John Toshack, and Ray Clemens.
[Guest 2]: And basically, they won everything. So obviously, you want to support a team that wins, but
[Guest 2]: also, they wore red, which was nice. And they came from Liverpool. And my father was a bit
[Guest 2]: of a lefty at the time, socialist working class town. So they were all the ingredients
[Guest 2]: for a father to tell a son, this is your team. And that was my team and still is. And I've,
[Guest 2]: and it's the team of my nephew and my daughters, if they support anyone, they support Liverpool.
[Guest 2]: So there's this funny, quirky thing. Then we came back to India, where we went to Kashmir.
[Guest 2]: Funny thing here is that when we went to England, I didn't speak any English. I understood apparently,
[Guest 2]: my parents would speak partly English, largely English to each other, because my mother's
[Guest 2]: from Kerala, my father's from the north. So that was the common language between them.
[Guest 2]: But I never spoke any English. And so I was put into school, my parents were worried wondering,
[Guest 2]: you know, how's this chap going to manage things. And they asked the teachers after
[Guest 2]: a few days and said, no, he speaks perfectly fluent English. So apparently, I'd picked
[Guest 2]: it all up, but never found the need to speak any English. But by the time I came back to
[Guest 2]: India a year later, I didn't speak any Hindi. I'd forgotten most of my English and, and
[Guest 2]: then my Hindi, sorry, and I had to pick it up again. And this was back in up in Kashmir
[Guest 2]: again, where I went to a school called the Presentation Convent, which was a girl's school
[Guest 2]: that accepted boys until class three, after which they were deemed to be too dangerous
[Guest 2]: to be around girls at the time. So yeah, so that's, that's the first, you know, five,
[Guest 2]: six years. Interesting thing there is I used to live on one side of the Jhelum and the
[Guest 2]: school was on the other side. So I'm probably one of the few people you guys know who used
[Guest 2]: to go to school by boat every day. I used to go to school by Shikara and the Shikarawala
[Guest 2]: had a small paddle called the Chappu. So, you know, you need to, if you want to cross
[Guest 2]: a river, you actually have to row upstream, and then you catch the current back down because
[Guest 2]: otherwise you get carried down beyond the past, the point that you go to. So that little
[Guest 2]: bit of river navigation, crossing the river every day, at the age of seven, walking to
[Guest 2]: school on your own and crossing the river, that's what Kashmir was like. This was in
[Guest 2]: Srinagar. That's what it was like in the in the mid 70s.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's, that's fascinating. And just speaking of Liverpool, I mean, one theory
[Amit Varma]: I read about why people support the clubs they do, is that at a particular age, which
[Amit Varma]: seems to correspond with whatever age you were, a team that's doing well, they end up
[Amit Varma]: supporting that team. And then later in life, that team may not do well or whatever, but
[Amit Varma]: they're lifelong supporters. But like good fortune for you that the Liverpool team has
[Amit Varma]: been so exciting over the last few years.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, I know it is. And I, you know, I used to hold it very strongly against the people
[Guest 2]: who started supporting ManU in the early 90s when, you know, when it when things started
[Guest 2]: coming on TV, but effectively, they were they're the same. They're the version of me from the
[Guest 2]: 90s, with the technology that was available that I was at the same time. So I've sort
[Guest 2]: of revisited that view. I still don't like Manchester United fans, but but not for that
[Amit Varma]: reason.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. So you know, what he was saying about Kashmir and how you think of it as home reminded
[Amit Varma]: me of a question that I, a chat I had with Amitabh Kumar on the show at the time we are
[Amit Varma]: recording is not yet out, but it'll be out soon. And I'll read this bit out. And then
[Amit Varma]: I'll come to my question from one of his books, where he wrote, in Raza's Adhagaon, the protest
[Amit Varma]: against the nation is being made in the name of the village, while the fiercely well educated
[Amit Varma]: Muslim students come to Gangauli to preach about partition and the necessity for the
[Amit Varma]: creation of a new nation of Pakistan. The Muslim villagers are genuinely bewildered.
[Amit Varma]: One of the villagers is a young man called Tandu, who has returned from battle fighting
[Amit Varma]: for the British in the Second World War. He argues against the urban visitors in the name
[Amit Varma]: of his village. And now these are his words. I'm a Muslim, but I love this village because
[Amit Varma]: I myself am this village. I love this indigo warehouse, this tank and these mud lanes because
[Amit Varma]: they are different forms of myself. On the battlefield, when death came very near, I
[Amit Varma]: certainly remembered Allah. But instead of Mecca or Karbala, I remembered Gangauli, stop
[Amit Varma]: quote, right. And, and what I asked Amitabh was what is your Gangauli? Because I wanted
[Amit Varma]: to kind of get a sense of what his notion of home is, because in my own sense, I just
[Amit Varma]: feel that it is very splintered. I no longer think of a place. I think there are disconnected
[Amit Varma]: memories that are people who are no more, there are things which have scattered or are
[Amit Varma]: not there anymore. And I found that interesting. And your answer, I guess, would therefore
[Guest 2]: be Kashmir, right? That's for you.
[Guest 2]: More specifically, I mean, it's, it's Kashmir broadly, and many different, you know, specific
[Guest 2]: aspects, specific memories. I learned how to swim in the Dal Lake. I learned, I did
[Guest 2]: a bit of skiing very early on. And these are sort of things that my contemporaries later
[Guest 2]: in life had not done. So maybe the fact that they'd not done them, reinforced the memories
[Guest 2]: that I had of these things and made them more special, at least to myself. But, but the
[Guest 2]: one image for me that really makes me, it's going to sound a bit cheesy, but I'm going
[Guest 2]: to say it anyway, makes me feel that I'm home is when I see the curve of the Shankaracharya
[Guest 2]: Hill, effectively going into the Dal Lake in the evening, there's a sense of, oh, gosh,
[Guest 2]: this is so familiar. And I, you know, I've lived in many other places, Delhi, notably
[Guest 2]: much more than I've lived in Srinagar. But there's no other visual that comes into mind
[Guest 2]: associated with a place more than that. So, and then other things like, you know, going
[Guest 2]: fishing for trout, going, going to Gulmarg on a weekend, people, you know, going to Pahalgam
[Guest 2]: on a weekend, these are the sort of things, you know, we would do. So I completely associate
[Guest 2]: with, you know, the feeling coming out of what you just read out. And yes, it is, it
[Guest 2]: is, it is Srinagar, more than any other place in the world.
[Amit Varma]: And Ajay, you know, you kind of zoned out because you were told we are going to talk
[Amit Varma]: about Akshay for the first one hour. But this is a question we haven't actually discussed.
[Amit Varma]: I'd like to ask you this also. What is home for you?
[Guest 1]: I was just struck by the coincidence. I also attended three years at Mount Mary convent,
[Guest 1]: because from class one to three boys were not so dangerous. Yeah, so I think for me
[Amit Varma]: home is Bandra.
[Amit Varma]: Home is Bandra for you. Lovely. So getting back to Akshay now after that brief Ajay break.
[Amit Varma]: So what after Kashmir, what happens?
[Guest 2]: Well, I switched schools, went to a boy school for a couple of years. And at the age of 10,
[Guest 2]: we moved to Delhi. I think your father was in government as well. So yeah, Kashmir Kada,
[Guest 2]: you get moved to the centre for a few years. And it was a big, big change in my life. I
[Guest 2]: mean, I went from being very much the small town boy. It shouldn't, in some ways, maybe
[Guest 2]: it shouldn't have been such a change. But I certainly felt it because, you know, my
[Guest 2]: parents had a social life in a community in Delhi, which was very natural to them, both
[Guest 2]: in government, they both went to Delhi University. So the sort of range of friends that they
[Guest 2]: had, and their kids, were people who I'd sort of met occasionally on holidays, and they
[Guest 2]: were uncles and aunties who were very close, who I loved and continue to, you know, be
[Guest 2]: in touch with. But I wasn't part of their world at all. And their world was, you know,
[Guest 2]: the kinds of holidays they'd been on the fact that they were either members of the Delhi
[Guest 2]: Gymkhana or the Delhi Golf Club. And we were not, my father refused to go to an interview
[Guest 2]: at the Delhi Gymkhana Club, because he had to wear a suit. And he said, if they're not
[Guest 2]: going to take me in the way that I am, then I don't want to be a member. Many years later,
[Guest 2]: maybe 30 years later, he wore a suit and went to an interview and became a member. But,
[Guest 2]: you know, that's another story. But so I moved to Delhi, it was a big change. And also school
[Guest 2]: was tougher, the level of education was slightly higher in Delhi, in primarily in maths and
[Guest 2]: in Hindi. So, you know, suddenly there was concepts in maths had not done before. I was
[Guest 2]: a good student in Kashmir had come, you know, second, third, fourth in class, incidentally
[Guest 2]: has to come second for nine exams in a row, three years, I came second to a girl called
[Guest 2]: Valley Call. And I wonder where she is and what she's doing. But I, there's no way that
[Guest 2]: I could sort of beat her. And in realization of that, I took the foot off the pedal and
[Guest 2]: I said, now third, fourth, which I like a person and I kind of think so. And that's,
[Guest 2]: it's something academically something I've sort of always kept as a working principle,
[Guest 2]: which is do well enough, do well enough not to get into trouble, do well enough to get
[Guest 2]: into the right college, do well enough to not be not disgrace yourself. But otherwise,
[Guest 2]: there's no real point in coming, you know, first or second, just do well enough. So anyway,
[Guest 2]: we came to Delhi, that's what I did. Then it was, you know, very much the life of living
[Guest 2]: in a government colony, playing cricket with boys, being told, you go out of the house,
[Guest 2]: come back when it's dark. That was a level of parental oversight that used to exist for
[Guest 2]: most of us, I think then. My house in Bharti Nagar in Delhi shared a wall with the community
[Guest 2]: center, which was called the club. There's where there was a badminton, badminton court,
[Guest 2]: the table tennis table. So it was literally you jump the wall and play sports as playing
[Guest 2]: sport all the time. Never was exceptionally good at anything, but again, did well enough
[Guest 2]: to be included in better players' sports. There was also a tennis court behind, learned
[Guest 2]: how to, you know, taught, we all taught ourselves how to play tennis. And it was, you know,
[Guest 2]: going around to Khan market and other India gate on our bikes. Interestingly, if you know
[Guest 2]: where the India Habitat Center is in Delhi, which it used to be barracks, it used to be
[Guest 2]: some BSF barracks, which were abandoned. And we used to play in those barracks. We then
[Guest 2]: played in the building site that became the Nehru Stadium before the 1982 Asian Games,
[Guest 2]: where they had these massive mounds of mud that had been dug out. And we would run up
[Guest 2]: and down them and roll down them and do that sort of thing. So it was just that sort of
[Guest 2]: carefree while not doing particularly well in school, but again, well enough. I think
[Guest 2]: the other, the next thing that's worth that, that was a big marker in my life was 1984.
[Guest 2]: And 1984 was, you know, again, looking back, it was much more of a defining moment than
[Guest 2]: it felt. I think there'll be a lot of people for whom this COVID period will be like that,
[Guest 2]: although it's much longer and arguably more traumatic, even though that was short and
[Guest 2]: sharp and horrible. But my parents were very, very liberal and in a variety of meanings
[Guest 2]: of that word. And they also were perhaps, you know, arguably slightly foolhardy. So
[Guest 2]: I was 17 when this happened, but they included me, took me along to on peace marches on,
[Guest 2]: I was very, very involved with a bunch of other contemporaries in relief efforts, went
[Guest 2]: to Gurdwaras, where people were taking shelter to write hundreds of affidavits, where, you
[Guest 2]: know, the various names that we all heard at the time, who were then members of the
[Guest 2]: ruling party, who their names as being leaders of mobs wrote affidavits, organized clothing,
[Guest 2]: did all of that sort of thing. But so it's this is not to say that I did some great thing,
[Guest 2]: but that that was a massively big waking up moment. And my parents allowed us to just
[Guest 2]: go and do this and not always supervised by them. You'd go off with other people who are
[Guest 2]: from university and made lots of friends. I was in class 12, the beginning of class
[Guest 2]: 12, made lots of friends who were in college, who came from similar backgrounds, but we
[Guest 2]: became friends over this much more than we had growing up because there's something,
[Guest 2]: something important had happened. And we felt that whatever little we were doing was somewhat
[Guest 2]: important at the time. So it was 84 for me was a very, very big deal. There was a very
[Guest 2]: ugly echo of that a few years later in 1988. And this is something that was sort of largely
[Guest 2]: forgotten in the annals of the time. But taking a cue from what had happened in 84, in 88,
[Guest 2]: there was a university and a gurdwara in Bidar in Karnataka that was attacked. And one of
[Guest 2]: my closest friends from school got killed in that in that riot. There were, you know,
[Guest 2]: three or four, five, six boys were killed. And that whole thing that that whole period
[Guest 2]: and the series of events that happened, and how they happened, the fact that there was
[Guest 2]: complicit, there was the government was sort of complicit in it. All of that has an effect
[Guest 2]: on what you think about politics, what you think about the narrative that a certain party
[Guest 2]: gives about what its role is. So I've never been able to sort of move on from a certain
[Guest 2]: aspect of what 1984 was. So that was the, there's another big, big thing in my life.
[Amit Varma]: It's kind of interesting that there are these moments, which form this kind of landscape,
[Amit Varma]: like when I talk to my guests of similar age or older than me, about these periods of time
[Amit Varma]: where we might have lived through together, they'll mention a time. And I'll straight
[Amit Varma]: away remember where was I when this happened. Like I remember being told about the 84 riots,
[Amit Varma]: for example, I was in a car with my parents from Delhi to Chandigarh, or vice versa, I
[Amit Varma]: don't remember in which direction they were going. And then my dad said, this horrible
[Amit Varma]: thing is happening. And people have been taken out of buses. And, you know, husbands are
[Amit Varma]: being killed in front of wives and all of this and all these stories were kind of coming.
[Amit Varma]: So it's just an odd feeling where someone tells you about something and you know, you
[Amit Varma]: realize I was like, I had another guest on the show where we realized that in 1989, at
[Amit Varma]: exactly the same time, we were at mood and ego together, though, obviously completely
[Amit Varma]: different and whatever 89 or 91 or whatever it was. So that's interesting. So many things
[Amit Varma]: to double click on. And one of them, of course, is that if there was a chapter on in a book
[Amit Varma]: about you, one chapter heading could be the importance of valley call, because what you
[Amit Varma]: said there is very interesting that because she was coming first all the time, you just
[Amit Varma]: said, screw it, I'm just going to chill and I'm going to do my thing. What if you had
[Amit Varma]: been coming first all the time? Like would it have then driven you to go to a different
[Amit Varma]: lens and made you a different person to just retain your position? I mean, which is I mean,
[Amit Varma]: you were kind of quipping when you said that, you know, there's not necessarily a causal
[Amit Varma]: relation. But it's interesting how we are shaped by all these sort of little things
[Amit Varma]: that happened to us.
[Guest 2]: You don't know how much I believe in that. It's there are some of the most sort of seminal
[Guest 2]: moments of decisions that I've taken, or parts that my life has taken have been on
[Guest 2]: utter randomness. I mean, utter randomness. I'll tell you one thing that happened much,
[Guest 2]: much later, which was, you know, I studied law in England, and I was going to come back
[Guest 2]: and join a senior council like everybody did at the time. There were no such things as
[Guest 2]: law firms really in India of any significance. And my mother happened to be visiting and
[Guest 2]: she came and said, you know, why don't you think of doing a little bit of work here in
[Guest 2]: England for a few months before you come back, not knowing at all what the job market was
[Guest 2]: like or anything. But I remember in university in Oxford, there was a something called the
[Guest 2]: eighths week brochure. The eighths week is when Oxford and Cambridge, there are lots
[Guest 2]: of rowing races basically. And in the brochure, there was this ad from this firm called Asha
[Guest 2]: St. Maurice Crisp, which had on one side, this picture of a guy in a boat and said,
[Guest 2]: Olympic rower, it was Johnny Searle of the Redgrave and Searle combination. And on the
[Guest 2]: other side, trainee solicitor, and it had him in a, wearing a suit on a desk in an office.
[Guest 2]: And it said offices in XYZ and Delhi. This was, so we're talking about 1995. And in that,
[Guest 2]: that moment, I remembered that that brochure and I said, okay, let me give these guys a
[Guest 2]: call. They had something in India. So let me call them. So I called directory inquiry,
[Guest 2]: literally, I called directory inquiry. And I said, you know, you have the number for
[Guest 2]: Asha St. Maurice Crisp, they're called Asha St. now and great people, I'm still in touch
[Guest 2]: with them. And they said, here it is, which should we connect you and they connected me.
[Guest 2]: So I ran through to the switchboard. And I said, can I speak to someone who has something
[Guest 2]: to do with India? And they looked at it, waited for a second, and they rang it through to
[Guest 2]: an extension, which rang to a secretary because the person who's extension it was wasn't there.
[Guest 2]: So I repeated my question. And she said, Oh, this is so and so he's in Delhi, here's a
[Guest 2]: fax number for him. And I was sitting in my boxer shorts and a pair of and a t shirt in
[Guest 2]: a friend's house in London, I had no access to a fax machine or anything of the sort.
[Guest 2]: So I took the number down and I said, okay, you know, dead end. Forgot about it. An hour
[Guest 2]: later, the phone rings, a phone rings, I pick it up. And this in the guy said, this is so
[Guest 2]: and so I believe you called my number. And I had this complete sort of, you know, twilight
[Guest 2]: zone moment. How is this guy called me because caller ID was almost unheard of, they happened
[Guest 2]: to have got it shortly before this happened. I didn't know how he called me, but I gathered
[Guest 2]: my wits. And I told him who I was. And it turned out that we had some similarities in
[Guest 2]: terms of what we'd studied and what we'd done in the past. He said, sounds interesting.
[Guest 2]: Send me your CV. So I sent him my CV. And he called me for an interview, I was called
[Guest 2]: for another couple of interviews, and they gave me a job. And that's how I became a corporate
[Guest 2]: lawyer. And that's how and I never ever have appeared in court, even for one day. So what
[Guest 2]: randomness is there is that your mother hints something to you, you call directory inquiry,
[Guest 2]: this whole series of things happen, caller ID is a thing. And you become a corporate
[Guest 2]: lawyer. I mean, so that valley call randomness is more speculative, because I was a kid and
[Guest 2]: God knows, I probably would have been, you know, more boring than I might have turned
[Guest 2]: out to be. But I'm secretly happy I did not come first, because I don't know whether that
[Guest 2]: that would have been the right signal for me that you know, this is something I probably
[Guest 2]: would have crashed and burned in trying to achieve high academic glory later on, better
[Guest 2]: to have sort of learnt this at age seven or eight, and moved on from there. But the randomness
[Guest 2]: point like 100%. Yeah, I mean, that's, that's another chapter
[Amit Varma]: title right there, the importance of caller ID. So just going back to those childhood
[Amit Varma]: years in Delhi, tell me also about, like, on the one hand, this is a familiar social
[Amit Varma]: circle. These are all your parents, friends there at home, you've met all the kids, you're
[Amit Varma]: going over the world to play sports, natural habitat. But on the other hand, what kind
[Amit Varma]: of sets you apart from all the other kids is that you were in Kashmir, you've gone to
[Amit Varma]: school on a boat, you've probably had quieter moments than they did. So all of you had quieter
[Amit Varma]: moments and kids today, because smartphones and all that you had a different layer to
[Amit Varma]: your personality, in a sense. Do you, you know, when you look back now, how important
[Amit Varma]: do you think was that layer? Did you notice it at that time? Did it kind of set you apart?
[Amit Varma]: Because when you are in just one homogenous world, you can kind of take everything for
[Amit Varma]: granted and that can constrain you in the way that you look at the world. But you also
[Amit Varma]: had this other sort of layer behind that.
[Guest 2]: Well, you know, at the time, it wasn't easy. Actually, I felt there was a degree to which
[Guest 2]: I felt left out. I wasn't necessarily invited to all the parties that these guys were, but
[Guest 2]: I had my colony friends, even though I had my time was, FOMO was a thing even then, right?
[Guest 2]: So I felt a bit of FOMO, especially because my parents were going to these people's homes,
[Guest 2]: but I wasn't in the in crowd. A lot of them also went to boarding school. So, you know,
[Guest 2]: when you are in boarding school, when you come back from the holidays, you hang out
[Guest 2]: with your boarding school guys. Also, one other thing was that, you know, you've spoken
[Guest 2]: very often to other people and it's obviously very true about privilege and we were all
[Guest 2]: terribly privileged, but there was no money. Privilege did not come with money, didn't
[Guest 2]: come with any disposable income to do anything, but other people in that social circle possibly
[Guest 2]: had it. So there were things that they were doing that I couldn't do. I just couldn't
[Guest 2]: do. I didn't miss it in any fundamental sense, but it was there every now and then I'd think
[Guest 2]: about it. But the flip side of that is that by the time I went to college, I was 18, I
[Guest 2]: happened to live in college and I was in the hostel and almost all my closest new friends
[Guest 2]: from college were not from this background. There were some who, there are a few who were,
[Guest 2]: but I was friends with people who traditionally would be in the hostel of a college in Delhi
[Guest 2]: University. So people who'd come from UP and Bihar and Andhra and other parts in the
[Guest 2]: Northeast and other parts of the country. So if I had been accepted more and if I had
[Guest 2]: been part of the social circle that I would, quote unquote, naturally have fallen into,
[Guest 2]: I would not have had this completely other, you know, side to my exposure, which made
[Guest 2]: me much, much more deeply aware about other parts of the country, what people were thinking,
[Guest 2]: what was important, what was going on. I mean, if you do history in St. Stephen's College
[Guest 2]: in the 80s, you are going to do the civil services. And why do you do the civil services?
[Guest 2]: There's a whole cultural and social and economic reason behind that, which was not part of
[Guest 2]: my socialization at all. My father went into the civil service to do good for the country,
[Guest 2]: but he could afford to do that in some ways because he came from, you know, relative privilege
[Guest 2]: and he went to good education, all the rest of it. But lots of my close friends didn't
[Guest 2]: have that sort of background. And it made me, you know, I can't say that it was, I became,
[Guest 2]: you know, a completely different person, but it gave me an insight into things I would
[Guest 2]: not have had. So in the longer term, I'm certainly grateful for that. But that layer, I think,
[Guest 2]: that you were talking about, that you started your question with, it was there. It was there.
[Guest 2]: This is a small townness to you, which doesn't completely go away. It doesn't, it doesn't
[Guest 2]: perhaps can manifest itself in small town thinking, but it just, it is another window
[Guest 2]: that has opened up that other people haven't, just haven't experienced.
[Amit Varma]: And another source for other layers, which other people would not have, were in a sense,
[Amit Varma]: what you said about your parents being liberals in different ways, you know, having their
[Amit Varma]: own set of concerns, like on the one hand, you're, you know, they're in government. So
[Amit Varma]: there is that aspect of it. But on the other hand, they're also liberal, you get involved
[Amit Varma]: in 1984, because of all of that happens. So tell me a little bit about how you are building
[Amit Varma]: your frameworks of looking at the world. Because I guess one direction to go in is you go in
[Amit Varma]: the same direction as your parents. The other direction to go in is that hey, kids are rebels,
[Amit Varma]: you go in some other direction. It also kind of matters what your peers around you are
[Amit Varma]: doing or reading like I remember when, I mean, my dad was also in the IAS. But I didn't really
[Amit Varma]: have any sort of coherent framework of looking at the world till I was well into adulthood.
[Amit Varma]: You know, not in college, because those are pre-internet days, you're not getting so much
[Amit Varma]: knowledge and information enough to be able to form those frameworks. My peers around
[Amit Varma]: me in Ferguson College in Pune didn't really we were just chilling, living our lives, having
[Amit Varma]: vague notions about everything. I remember for a week I carried around Das Capital in
[Amit Varma]: my rucksack when I was 17. Because I thought, hey, it's a cool thing to do, right? And till
[Amit Varma]: I actually read it much later. So what was that sort of, how was that process of formulating
[Amit Varma]: a way of looking at the world? Like, was your journey also something from a certain kind
[Amit Varma]: of vagueness into, you know, getting sharpened a little bit more as time goes by? Were there
[Amit Varma]: inheritances in a sense, or received wisdoms that you had to cast aside? Or did you early
[Guest 2]: on find a groove that you could fit into? I liked what you just said, you know, received
[Guest 2]: wisdoms to cast aside. It wasn't to cast them aside, but to reframe them in a way that was
[Guest 2]: relevant to the person I became later on. So, my sister and I, we were never told that
[Guest 2]: this is what you should do for a career at all, very, very far from it. But there was
[Guest 2]: a very strong sense that you can't be doing things only for yourself, that there needs
[Guest 2]: to be some part of public service in a vague sense. That's one. Secondly, there was this
[Guest 2]: said and unsaid both implication that you can't have a non-intellectual life. Again,
[Guest 2]: I have no criticism of this now, but you can't become a manager in a hotel, because that's
[Guest 2]: not an intellectual life. Now, you can be a manager in a hotel and have a perfectly
[Guest 2]: intellectual life, but it was very much that your intellectual life must be wrapped into
[Guest 2]: what you do as your work, as whatever your primary work is. And do whatever you want,
[Guest 2]: but work as hard as you can and enjoy it. And don't do something you don't enjoy. So,
[Guest 2]: these are actually very difficult standards. Even though they are vague, it's easiest in
[Guest 2]: some ways when someone says, go and join the IAS. So, you were then left with these ideas
[Guest 2]: and the pressure of finding a career that works for yourself or various parts of life,
[Guest 2]: not just a career that work for you, that somehow build these things in because of the
[Guest 2]: pressure of them. And at the same time, you're not being someone you are not. So, I think
[Guest 2]: that's a process that continues till today actually. I don't think that it's, I'm still
[Guest 2]: continuing to, as you said, shed some of those things, but I don't think in some of those
[Guest 2]: basic values, I don't think have changed. I still enjoy, it goes up and down. Sometimes
[Guest 2]: I just want to watch football, but I want an intellectual life. I want the work that
[Guest 2]: I do to have some significance beyond just for me and my family. Those things remain
[Guest 2]: and those things I still encourage other people to think about as well because they are fulfilling.
[Guest 2]: And they can be fulfilling irrespective of what else, what the actual content of your
[Guest 2]: work is. So, yeah, that's how that whole thing played out. But one big difference between
[Guest 2]: my parents and me is that I don't have the view towards money that they had. It was very
[Guest 2]: much like money and business is not such a good thing. And I, on the other hand, do not
[Guest 2]: believe that at all, as you will have seen from the paper that we wrote. And we can obviously
[Guest 2]: talk about that later. But I think that properly done, it's a really positive force. And that
[Guest 2]: I worked in corporate law for most of the last 25 odd years. So I was helping people
[Guest 2]: make money and making a little bit myself at the same time. So that's one big difference.
[Guest 2]: But there are other things that you do that you hope has have that broader impact that
[Amit Varma]: I believe that work should have. I agree entirely that I keep saying that the
[Amit Varma]: best kind of social work is actually making a profit honestly, because the only way to
[Amit Varma]: make a profit is to make someone better off. I was struck by what you said about kind of
[Amit Varma]: finding yourself or trying to figure out who you were and all of that. And that again brings
[Amit Varma]: me to that nebulous notion of the self, like when we are young, especially when we are
[Amit Varma]: young, all our lives, but when we are young, especially, we are too often, you know, dealing
[Amit Varma]: with the anxiety of what other people think of us or what they expect of us. And we start
[Amit Varma]: shaping ourselves in those modes, like you spoke about the pressure that you had to had
[Amit Varma]: an intellectual life, but at the same time, whatever career or calling you took had to
[Amit Varma]: be authentic to that intellectual life, and they had to kind of go together. So one to
[Amit Varma]: what extent is, you know, did you feel those anxieties and, you know, given to those pressures,
[Amit Varma]: whatever they were, and to just a general question throughout the sweep of your life,
[Amit Varma]: that how, you know, how difficult has it been for you to eventually get comfortable in your
[Amit Varma]: own skin, you know, eventually to be able to kind of sit back and say that, okay, this
[Amit Varma]: is who I am, these are the things I like doing, like, yes, intellectual life, but I want to
[Amit Varma]: watch football also, or whatever. What's that kind of process been like, because, you know,
[Amit Varma]: just looking at myself, and many of the guests I've spoken to, it's not smooth at all, you
[Amit Varma]: kind of go through life with this kind of inertia, where you're rarely except in some
[Amit Varma]: moments really making movement, either in terms of understanding yourself or doing things.
[Amit Varma]: And it's just a process that can take a long time.
[Guest 2]: No, it's ongoing. It's not at no point have I felt, okay, this is the perfect mean. And
[Guest 2]: there are many other pressures in life beyond just work that that, you know, one has to
[Guest 2]: do. It's not, I've never thought of it as anxiety. I've never been, it's not something
[Guest 2]: I've been anxious about. But I'd be lying if I said that I didn't worry about what other
[Guest 2]: people thought, I wish I could say I really don't care. I, but even that is a process
[Guest 2]: I care much less now. And which is one of the reasons why I'm possibly able to say some
[Guest 2]: of the things that I'm saying now than I would have 20 years ago. So I think it's a question
[Guest 2]: of how confident you are, and how confident you are, for me is a function of what is it
[Guest 2]: that you've done in the body of your life. And if you've ended up doing something which
[Guest 2]: you think, okay, this is a bit worthwhile, then you can be a little more flamboyant and
[Guest 2]: cavalier with the rest of it, I find. So that's, that process is ongoing.
[Amit Varma]: And what were the kind of books you read while growing up? I mean, I know you played a lot
[Amit Varma]: of sports, jumping over walls itself seems like a sport to me, to actually jump over
[Amit Varma]: a wall and then have the energy to do something else is not something I can imagine in myself.
[Amit Varma]: But what were the kind of books that you were reading? Who were the people who influenced
[Amit Varma]: you? Do you remember any early heroes at that time? And even sporting heroes are fine, but
[Amit Varma]: who were your kind of heroes? And especially, did you have a notion of yourself in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, when I am an adult, I want to be like this person, this is like the ideal
[Guest 2]: kind of person to be like?
[Guest 2]: No, that I don't think I had with any one person. But my sporting hero growing up was
[Guest 2]: Sunil Gavaskar. It was and I met him once in 1975, in a bookshop in Pune. And that was
[Guest 2]: a high point in my life. But you know, it's very difficult to say what books shaped me
[Guest 2]: because I read enormously. I mean, apart from sport, the only other thing you had to do
[Guest 2]: was reading. My parents only, actually, my father and I sneaked out and bought a television
[Guest 2]: in 1987 for the 1987 World Cup. Before that, there was no TV at home, we would go to my
[Guest 2]: grandmother's house to watch bits of you know, highlights of sports and things like that.
[Guest 2]: They were, my parents were against television. It wasn't just, that was a conscious decision.
[Guest 2]: But so books were where it was and they were, the house was wall to wall with books. We
[Guest 2]: used to, in my early, in my, you know, before I turned 10, Narnia was very, very big, the
[Guest 2]: whole C.S. Lewis pantheon. I probably read Charlie and the Chocolate Factory 35 times
[Guest 2]: in my life. I absolutely adore that book. It was, it was just warm and nice and wonderful.
[Guest 2]: Later on, you know, then one of the things that we did when we came to Delhi is became
[Guest 2]: members of the B.C. Roy Children's Library at ITO. So, you know, so we would actually,
[Guest 2]: me and my cousin Nandika who lived with us at the time, we used to get onto a DTC bus
[Guest 2]: from Bharti Nagar, go to ITO, go to B.C. Roy Library, borrow books. And that could be anything,
[Guest 2]: you know, it could all sorts of different types of stuff. I read my first Alastair Maclean
[Guest 2]: from there. I read all sorts of children's books, so maybe till the age of 14, 13, 14.
[Guest 2]: But then there was a rapid switch where our parents sort of handed us a read this, read
[Guest 2]: this, read this. And those could include, you know, Steinbeck. Steinbeck was a big influence
[Guest 2]: in terms, I love the lyricism of his writing, where you can make the sound of running water
[Guest 2]: sound like the most amazing thing on earth. So, mice and men and grapes of wrath and all
[Guest 2]: of those. And then we then we started reading the existentialists relatively early. So,
[Guest 2]: Gide and Camus and all of this. And there were a sufficient number of friends whose
[Guest 2]: parents also were handing them the same book. So, we would quietly have that discussion
[Guest 2]: amongst us, not talking to other people, because they would say, what is this rubbish, you're
[Guest 2]: trying to be a sood. That word has gone out of favor. Now nobody calls anyone a sood anymore.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, in fact, I'm hearing it after 20 years, I think.
[Guest 2]: There you are. So, you know, maybe it's a good thing that sood is not a bad thing. But
[Guest 2]: it was. So, you'd hide a bit of your intellectualism, because you would think that you're trying
[Guest 2]: to be better than them. And James Baldwin, I loved as well. I mean, Another Country is
[Guest 2]: one of my favorite books from the time. So, there was just, there was a lot. Also, there
[Guest 2]: was and nobody, I haven't heard anyone else admit this, but I've not listened to all your
[Guest 2]: shows. But also to, there was this whole range of slightly raunchy thrillers, where the pages
[Guest 2]: where the raunchy bits were always a little more dog-eared than the other pages. And,
[Guest 2]: you know, so those were, those were also there at home, and they were also out in the bookshelf.
[Guest 2]: And, you know, we would read those. So, huge variety.
[Amit Varma]: And you were, of course, the one dog-earing them. You know, before we move on beyond this
[Amit Varma]: phase to studying and law and all of that, tell me a bit about how different was Delhi
[Amit Varma]: in those days?
[Guest 2]: Oh, you know, this, I'm telling you this, I said this in 1996 or 7, when I went to Lahore
[Guest 2]: for the first time, that Lahore felt like Delhi 20 years ago, at that time. So, Delhi
[Guest 2]: in the late 70s was, you know, this idyllic vision of lying out in a garden after a nice
[Guest 2]: meat curry and rice lunch on a rug with the sun having a nap. That is one of my images
[Guest 2]: of Delhi at that time, where the sky was blue, where birds were chirping. As I said, we used
[Guest 2]: to go around everywhere by cycle and by bus, and there was no, nobody had a car or a driver
[Guest 2]: to take you anywhere. So, obviously, that restricted the, you know, where you went.
[Guest 2]: But we'd go on Sunday mornings, for example, to Sapru House to watch movies. Sapru House
[Guest 2]: had children's movies on a Sunday morning, which were either free or cheap, I don't remember.
[Guest 2]: And a whole bunch of us boys would get in and go there and watch a movie. North by Northwest,
[Guest 2]: I remember watching there, being absolutely terrified as a 12-year-old because I'd been
[Guest 2]: gone with some 15-year-olds. We'd also go, you'd go and, you know, wander around the
[Guest 2]: ramparts of Purana Qila, walking again, walking or cycling. So, it was, there was a sense
[Guest 2]: of, in a small space, utter freedom. So, the radius of where we did all of this stuff must
[Guest 2]: have been five kilometers, but there was utter freedom in that five kilometers. And in fact,
[Guest 2]: you know, as you know, I moved to Paris a year and a half ago, and one of the reasons
[Guest 2]: to move was because I wanted to give my daughters that independence that I felt growing up,
[Guest 2]: that they, it's very difficult to give any child in Delhi, much less girls, and I have
[Guest 2]: four of them. So, so that's what Delhi, that's, that's sort of my image of Delhi at the time
[Guest 2]: is just sunny winters is, you know, is my sort of idyllic image of Delhi then.
[Amit Varma]: And my next question actually has something to do with both growing up and parenthood.
[Amit Varma]: Like one of the recent guests on my show, I recorded with him a couple of days back,
[Amit Varma]: I have no idea if his episode will release before or after yours, was the guitarist Warren
[Amit Varma]: Mendonza, Blackstrat Blues. And one of his albums is called The Last Analog Generation.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason he titled his album that way, was that he said, look, he just had a daughter.
[Amit Varma]: And he said that, I realized that I am from the last analog generation, that the way my
[Amit Varma]: daughter grows up will be so fundamentally different from mine. And that difference will
[Amit Varma]: be much starker than between any two generations. And I just think that, you know, when I, you
[Amit Varma]: know, you and I would have grown up, even though there's some difference, we, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I'm in my late 40s, we would have grown up in pretty much the same kind of way. You're
[Amit Varma]: going outdoors a lot, you're meeting friends, when you're bored, you either read a book
[Amit Varma]: or you go out or whatever, or you look into space, which is perfectly respectable and
[Amit Varma]: whatever. While today, kids are just surrounded by sensory influences. They're always on their
[Amit Varma]: smartphones. You know, Jonathan Haidt once made this great point that's stuck with me,
[Amit Varma]: so I keep mentioning it on the show. So it's become a bit of a cliche that people today,
[Amit Varma]: even though they have all the wealth of knowledge available to them through human history, everybody
[Amit Varma]: is actually consuming something that was produced in the last three days. Right? So you go from
[Amit Varma]: immediate experience to immediate experience. There is no tear off, in a sense, there is
[Amit Varma]: no reflection, no sitting back, you know, and in future, you may not be playing along
[Amit Varma]: the ramparts of the Red Fort, in real life, but in the metaverse, you know, it's just
[Amit Varma]: so, you know, as someone who's a father of four kids, and as someone who himself has
[Amit Varma]: grown up the way that you did with relative freedom, and you said you wanted to be out
[Amit Varma]: of here for that reason, what are sort of your thoughts on this? Like, obviously, there
[Amit Varma]: are differences between how people will grow up when they're 30 years apart and so on.
[Amit Varma]: But this seems to me to be really fundamental. What are your kind of thoughts from what you've
[Amit Varma]: seen and experienced?
[Guest 2]: I have two sets of thoughts. I think one is that there's no doubt that more and more life
[Guest 2]: is going to be online. I'm just wondering, I'm wondering whether there's a bit, the worm
[Guest 2]: is turning slightly, though, because when I look at my kids, they're not, they look
[Guest 2]: at Instagram, and they've got their phones and all of that. But they're also doing other
[Guest 2]: things. And they're not doing it just because, you know, of parental supervision, there's
[Guest 2]: only so much you can do. And, but they even their friends, they might, you know, one of
[Guest 2]: my daughters, the other weekend said, I'm going out, where are you going? I'm going
[Guest 2]: to an exhibition, I'm going to a museum with a friend for an exhibition. I think it's also
[Guest 2]: the context if you if you make these other experiences, cultural experiences easy to
[Guest 2]: access. And if there's a culture within which they are valued, then kids will pick it up.
[Guest 2]: And we force our kids sometimes on every weekend, we'll either go to a park, or we'll go to
[Guest 2]: a museum or a dance performance or something or the other. And there'll always be a bit
[Guest 2]: of mourning before you go. And there'll always be enjoyment once you've gone. And you can
[Guest 2]: only hope that that will get picked up. And then they'll realize that these real experiences
[Guest 2]: in the physical world interacting with human beings and the art that they produce or the
[Guest 2]: various different kinds has a value that you don't get. And things like Instagram, my kids
[Guest 2]: don't post on it anymore. They look and they use it as messaging. So, the consumption of
[Guest 2]: content, you're saying in the last three days, I think there was a period, there's a high
[Guest 2]: watermark of that. And I'm no expert on the digital world. So, I don't know whether that's
[Guest 2]: still there or it's passed. But at least in for my kids, it seems to have passed a little
[Guest 2]: bit. Because they are getting maybe it's because of what they study in school, then you have
[Guest 2]: a question and you say, okay, let's go back and look at the Great Northern War or whatever
[Guest 2]: it might be. And they will read the article. One of my daughters wrote a paper recently
[Guest 2]: on the crown. And to say, you know, was it, you know, was it right for it not to for them
[Guest 2]: to put out a disclaimer saying that there are this fictionalization over here. And in
[Guest 2]: doing so, she had to go back and look at the history and did a bit of reading around it.
[Guest 2]: And that's something that I think kids need a bit of guidance. And therefore, I'm not
[Guest 2]: one of those people who let them do what they want. But there's that instinct and that spark
[Guest 2]: is there. So, I can't comment on whether there's a massive change going on or whether we've
[Guest 2]: reached the peak or not. But at least in my own limited experience, there's a bit of a
[Guest 2]: change there. But life is there's lots of life that's online, which this was an option
[Amit Varma]: for us.
[Amit Varma]: And that leads me to the thought that is there one kind of scarcity in India, which doesn't
[Amit Varma]: get talked about so much like when you said that, you know, your daughter's reputed museum
[Amit Varma]: with a friend and all of that and you can do that in Paris, you have those rich cultural
[Amit Varma]: experiences in the Western world, all around you. In India, do those rich cultural experiences
[Amit Varma]: really exist? Like I think about the things that I would do in Bombay, for example, you
[Amit Varma]: know, and actually, I'm probably being unfair by saying that because I in any case, you
[Amit Varma]: know, I'm not a theater going person, for example, I'm sure there's a scene at Prithvi
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. But in general, in India, certainly outside the big cities, is it then
[Amit Varma]: something that never gets talked about that those kinds of cultural experiences are actually
[Amit Varma]: lacking. So if kids are bored, if you're sitting in, say, Kanpur, or, you know, wherever any
[Amit Varma]: small town anywhere, what do you do with your time? You know, you don't have those wholesome
[Amit Varma]: experiences. So you go online, and you do whatever and that becomes a thing.
[Guest 2]: No, and I don't think that's necessarily just a problem with India. I think it's a problem
[Guest 2]: with any society. And France is the opposite of that, which doesn't value the cultural
[Guest 2]: experience on a day to day basis. I mean, I've been going to France for many, many years.
[Guest 2]: But it's only after living there that you realize how much of it is part of the fabric
[Guest 2]: of day to day life. It's not, you would not be surprised to have a chat with the cab driver
[Guest 2]: and him tell you what exhibition he was going to that he was some other thing that he was
[Guest 2]: looking forward to, or listening to classical music while taking you from point A to point
[Guest 2]: B. And every small town, the social compact is such that it is expected that one of the
[Guest 2]: things that your tax euros are going to do is provide you access to culture. So if you
[Guest 2]: I don't know if you picked up but during COVID, one of the biggest constituencies and there's
[Guest 2]: a very large number of people involved in the sector that was hit very badly was the
[Guest 2]: entire area of culture. And there was a lot of public support for people who were in the
[Guest 2]: world of culture saying, look, these are the people who we depend on. So if you go to a
[Guest 2]: museum, and you get a guide at the museum, somebody who's part of the museum staff, the
[Guest 2]: chances that they the way to a PhD in art are reasonably high. So the society and I
[Guest 2]: think this is probably true of some of the older cultures in Europe, certainly in non
[Guest 2]: English speaking places, that this is valued, and money is put into it. And therefore, it's
[Guest 2]: something that's available. So it's a, you know, there's a demand because there's a supply.
[Guest 2]: And this is one of those situations where I think that, you know, as much as I believe
[Guest 2]: that in sort of free markets, that you have to be a rich society in some ways to then
[Guest 2]: say, okay, we're actually going to take some of the money that the free market generates
[Guest 2]: and put it into this, because that's also essential for us as human beings. So you'll
[Guest 2]: find that in a lot of Europe, I think. But there's no question that, you know, in India
[Guest 2]: and in other places, this has just fallen off the band, the sort of horizon completely.
[Guest 2]: And that's why you will find some of the more creativity that you will get out of these
[Guest 2]: small places is, is on things like TikTok.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, TikTok getting banned was so tragic. I keep going on about that because
[Amit Varma]: it's such an incredible cauldron of creativity, really. And I wonder whether it's a function
[Amit Varma]: of poverty, that of course, we're a poor country. And that is why, you know, in our hierarchy
[Amit Varma]: of needs, culture is like, way beyond people are more just focused on the immediate so
[Amit Varma]: culture comes later. Or is there something deeper? I mean, you know, you do among privileged
[Amit Varma]: sets of people, you do have a certain kind of cultural life, like the music festivals
[Amit Varma]: in South India, for example, and so on and so forth. But in general, in the life of the
[Amit Varma]: common person, like here, you will not find a taxi driver who's going to a museum, for
[Amit Varma]: example, you know, so but that's I mean, that's neither here nor there. So tell me about the
[Amit Varma]: so what, what's the next step then that you know, you've childhood in Delhi, you've done
[Amit Varma]: your schooling and all of that. How did you start gravitating towards law? Like was it
[Amit Varma]: kind of happenstance in a series of accidents? What was your conception of a future Akshay
[Guest 2]: at that age? What did you want to be? Well, actually, I thought of law relatively early
[Guest 2]: during college years. Again, if you were in Delhi University in the 80s, there were three
[Guest 2]: or four different types of careers that were available to you. If you're doing economics
[Guest 2]: or maths or physics or one of those things, then you could possibly go to, you know, you'd
[Guest 2]: go to one of the IIMs or one of the business schools, that was one route. The other route
[Guest 2]: was this phalanx of people who would go and do the civil services exam. And the reason
[Guest 2]: I did it was just didn't do it at all, didn't even look in that direction. It was very simply
[Guest 2]: the value of my time was too much. So to spend potentially 1, 2, 3, 4 years of your life
[Guest 2]: repeatedly studying for an exam in which your chances of success were very low, just didn't
[Guest 2]: seem and for a career that I valued, appreciated, but wasn't mad about, I didn't see the point.
[Guest 2]: So I didn't even look in that direction. And the third thing to do was to go abroad to
[Guest 2]: study. So I chose this, that option because it wasn't sort of, I hadn't done maths, I
[Guest 2]: did history in college and was not, you know, calculus was beyond me. And so I took that
[Guest 2]: option and really it was because partly by default, partly because both my parents studied
[Guest 2]: abroad and they talked about the wonderful things that it had done for them. So the one
[Guest 2]: thing that you're not supposed to write in a personal statement, which is that I'm going
[Guest 2]: abroad to expand my horizons. That was why I wanted to go abroad. I didn't know what
[Guest 2]: I wanted to do with my degree. So I first went to, I went to Columbia to do a master's
[Guest 2]: in international affairs. It was an area, it was sort of politics. It was interesting.
[Guest 2]: I specialized in international law in that. And then I came, I did that for two years.
[Guest 2]: And it was completely a horizon sort of opening experience. First time I'd, apart from that
[Guest 2]: one year where the Liverpool love came, I'd never been abroad. I mean, we didn't, families
[Guest 2]: at that time didn't have the money to go abroad for holidays. So all holidays were leave,
[Guest 2]: travel, concession, piled into a train, going to see grandparents in Pune or whatever. That's
[Guest 2]: what the rich, rich, rich, especially in lots of the country like that, but never been abroad.
[Guest 2]: So lined up in New York in 1989, not knowing how to really operate a computer, done it
[Guest 2]: once or twice. I typed my personal statements on a brother typewriter, never used a washing
[Guest 2]: machine, learned how to cook a bit, knew how to cook a few things, but wasn't required
[Guest 2]: to cook. So all of this stuff, plus doing a degree in which, I'm sure Ajay had a similar
[Guest 2]: experience, doing a degree in which you had to do an enormous amount of reading every
[Guest 2]: week. I was reading 12, 1500 pages and going to class, so much so that I got an ulcer which
[Guest 2]: was diagnosed as a stress ulcer, but apparently ulcers are not caused by stress, they're caused
[Guest 2]: by bacteria, because I was doing, trying to do as much of the reading in the reading list
[Guest 2]: as possible. And I went to my supervisor and he said, how's it going? And I said, it's
[Guest 2]: going fine, but you know, there's a lot of work. So he said, yeah, but you know, what's
[Guest 2]: the problem? So I said, look at this reading list. He said, are you by any chance trying
[Guest 2]: to read everything on the reading list? So I said, yes. He said, but you're not supposed
[Guest 2]: to, you're supposed to pick and choose. And that's when I took the pressure off myself
[Guest 2]: and then thoroughly enjoyed my degree. Fantastic university, the format where everything was
[Guest 2]: not dependent on one exam. I'm a terrible examinee. So I did well enough again, but
[Guest 2]: I had to study hard to do well in exams. I had to study hard to do okay in exams, class
[Guest 2]: performance always okay. In fact, I was once in college thrown out of class for asking
[Guest 2]: too many questions, but they were on the topic. So anyway, I was told by the tutor, you think
[Guest 2]: that you know more than me? Because I said, he hadn't answered my question. You can leave
[Guest 2]: the class, don't have to come back to for the rest of the term, I'll give you attendance.
[Guest 2]: And at the end of my degree, I got a first in his paper, I went back to him and said,
[Guest 2]: thank you, sir, you really helped me a lot. Anyway, there's a little, but it's so, so
[Guest 2]: the big thing was that they were these fantastic sort of the ability to listen to these fantastic
[Guest 2]: professors and have the freedom to question views. You know, I always say that our system,
[Guest 2]: at least then maybe a little less now was, was basically based on what are the five causes
[Guest 2]: for the decline of the Mughal Empire. That you have to give five, six are not required,
[Guest 2]: four isn't enough. And there it was, you know, the questions were a completely different
[Guest 2]: type. And there are people like Bhagwati and various others sort of teaching you luminary
[Guest 2]: legal luminaries, people who were practitioners and going and doing human rights work in Africa
[Guest 2]: and coming and teaching a course about that. So it was mind opening completely. So did
[Guest 2]: that, came back to India, worked for a couple of years at TERI, which was where I started
[Guest 2]: around 92, started working on the real climate convention, convention and did some paper
[Guest 2]: writing and research and that sort of thing on that. And that's where the interest in
[Guest 2]: this continuing interest sort of stems from here. We are 30 years after that. It's difficult
[Guest 2]: to think of 1992 as 30 years ago, but there you are. And I have friendships and contacts
[Guest 2]: from that period, which, you know, people who are now the top thinkers in that field
[Guest 2]: in India. Yeah. So that's what, that was the next step. And then law was after that. So
[Guest 2]: I came back and I signed up for evening classes because I was never happy with the idea of
[Guest 2]: being an academic and just writing something and then it going into a paper or a report.
[Guest 2]: There was one box from the world development report from 1990 that I wrote. That was just,
[Guest 2]: you know, it was otherwise you wrote a paper, which is what I'm doing now. So it's a bit
[Guest 2]: surprising that I'm saying that, but at that point, at a 25 year old me, it wasn't or 24
[Guest 2]: year old me, it wasn't what I wanted to do. So I went back to the idea of doing law, enrolled
[Guest 2]: in evening classes in Delhi University and had a fight with a tutor or the professor
[Guest 2]: and left and didn't go back. Here's another coincidence. A friend's, a cousin's friend
[Guest 2]: came and said, help me fill out my application form for Oxford because I'm going there. So
[Guest 2]: I said, hey, let me photocopy it and let me also apply to do law. And that's how I applied
[Guest 2]: to Oxford to do law. And then I got in and went. So again, a big, big coincidence. If
[Guest 2]: he hadn't come, maybe I'd have just finished that degree and God knows what I would have
[Amit Varma]: done after that.
[Amit Varma]: What is crazy if he goes somewhere else that day or twists his ankle instead or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, you just said 1992, 30 years, it's kind of hard to think of it as 30 years
[Amit Varma]: ago, right? And one of the things that I've been thinking of recently is, you know, when
[Amit Varma]: we are kids, time seems like, so sort of stretched out, you know, when you're 20, 30 seems like
[Amit Varma]: really old, you know, you'll romanticize and say, oh, you know, bunch of people died at
[Amit Varma]: 27, bunch of people died at 34. And it seems old enough. And then before you know it, the
[Amit Varma]: decades pass, and you're suddenly in your 40s, 50s, whatever. And you realize that that
[Amit Varma]: span of time, which when you were young, you thought was a lot, maybe three decades in
[Amit Varma]: this case, isn't really a lot. And when you think of, you know, when you speak of history,
[Amit Varma]: you think of something happening 200 years ago, right? When you're a kid, 200 years ago
[Amit Varma]: is a long, long time ago. It's history, history. But I think when you're our age, it's not
[Amit Varma]: really that long ago. It's like four or five times what has just passed in a flash almost
[Amit Varma]: for us. And does that realization come to you and does that then shape the way you look
[Amit Varma]: at the world in terms of your priorities and the way you might define happiness, for example,
[Amit Varma]: the fact that, you know, time passes really quickly. I don't mean this just in the sense
[Amit Varma]: of being more aware of your own mortality, but just you get it, time passes really fast
[Amit Varma]: and does that. And it's really a question for both of you, I guess.
[Guest 2]: I'm not bothered by it. I don't really think about that. I think about it a lot, but more
[Guest 2]: from an interesting, you know, what does this period of time mean? So I was speaking to
[Guest 2]: my mother just a couple of days ago. And I said, I just realized that I was born only
[Guest 2]: 20 years after independence. So you think, you know, the India that I was born into would
[Guest 2]: have been so dramatically different to the India today. I have only a child sense of
[Guest 2]: it, not in 67, but the few years after that. But that it was such a fresh India, you know,
[Guest 2]: in some ways, it was such a new India. And that was the India I was born into. And this
[Guest 2]: is the India I'm living in. It's just those kinds of thoughts I find interesting to have
[Guest 2]: every now and then and to just go into a bit of an indulgence, self-indulgence to think
[Guest 2]: about what that means. But the other thing, the other type of thing I think of, and again,
[Guest 2]: when you have kids, you realize that how different a period of time is for them than it is for
[Guest 2]: you. Now, two years for a 16-year-old is an eighth of their life. And that's the COVID
[Guest 2]: period. So an eighth of my elder daughter's life has been COVID. An eighth of my life
[Guest 2]: is nothing. I mean, compared to that, it's a huge period. But for her, the importance
[Guest 2]: of it, for me, this is just a two-fifty-fourth. So that's the kind of frame in which I tend
[Guest 2]: to think of this. What about you, Ajay?
[Guest 1]: Yeah, I've also thought precisely what you just described. The Second World War ended
[Guest 1]: in 1945. India got freedom in 1947. And my birth year, 1966, is actually closer to those dates
[Guest 1]: than we would otherwise think. So there's a freshness of that period and the way our
[Guest 1]: parents talked about those events, of the freedom movement, of how I felt the day I
[Guest 1]: heard Gandhiji was murdered, you know, those kinds of things. There's a freshness of experience
[Guest 1]: there, which would not strike a person growing up in today's world with that same level of
[Guest 1]: proximity. Similarly, I often notice that I've spent a bigger fraction of my life in
[Guest 1]: the 20th century than in the 21st century. In a fundamental way, I'm wired like a thinker
[Guest 1]: of the 20th century. And it has lessons of its own. And it carries a drama on a stage
[Guest 1]: of a cosmic scale of the kind of things that we don't think about in this world today.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, like, another aspect of this is like, sometimes I have to remind myself
[Amit Varma]: that look, 60 or 70% of the country or whatever is born after liberalization, after this trip,
[Amit Varma]: you know, 1992, which we now realize is so long ago. And it's striking because I realized
[Amit Varma]: that in the way that I look at the world, for example, there are certain realities I
[Amit Varma]: take completely for granted. They are solidified for me. One of them might be what the nation
[Amit Varma]: state of India is, for example, the idea of India, I think many people our age, in fact,
[Amit Varma]: are sort of having to reconsider the notion that the country is what they thought it was,
[Amit Varma]: that maybe it's something different, and they were in their little bubbles, and they didn't
[Amit Varma]: realize it. And similarly, there is that sense that young people today, don't have a lot
[Amit Varma]: of that shared bedrock of understanding the world or looking at the world in the way that
[Amit Varma]: we do now. And I think as communicators, also, I keep reminding myself that we can fall for
[Amit Varma]: the curse of knowledge in the sense that we can assume that, you know, if the three of
[Amit Varma]: us are talking, there are certain shared experiences, which we can just relate to just like that,
[Amit Varma]: that you could say 84. And we all three of us know what you mean in a visceral level,
[Amit Varma]: not just in terms of but to a young person, it may just be a date, they may not even make
[Amit Varma]: that connection. You know, and that's kind of interesting, because I think we, you know,
[Amit Varma]: are my or I'll speak for myself, my notion of the world to a large extent is based on
[Amit Varma]: really a small sample size of things. Like what is a nation state like? What is democracy
[Amit Varma]: like? What happens in autocracies? How do things happen? You look at trends, but actually,
[Amit Varma]: it's a really small sample size of things happening just two, three, four centuries
[Amit Varma]: long. And that's not enough to go on. And to assume that there is always a directionality
[Amit Varma]: that say the arc of history will bend one way or the other. It might be an illusion
[Amit Varma]: because we don't have enough data. We have not enough life has been lived. So it's not
[Amit Varma]: something you ever kind of remind yourself, are there moments where you step back and
[Amit Varma]: say that, wait a minute, you know, I'm, for example, taking the shape of India, you know,
[Amit Varma]: woman with a sari in the map for granted. It wasn't like that, you know, 70, 80 years
[Amit Varma]: ago, and it may not be like that 80 years ago, we just don't know, stuff like that.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, even Kashmir, you know, all our certainties around Kashmir have had to change radically,
[Guest 2]: right?
[Guest 2]: Yeah, and I think it's, I think that's done by time and place. I was just reading recently
[Guest 2]: about why we should try and think like a Russian citizen today, when we think about what's
[Guest 2]: happening with respect to Ukraine and NATO. And, you know, Putin is obviously betting
[Guest 2]: on the fact that what he's doing has resonance because his internal situation to him is more
[Guest 2]: important, and perhaps more precarious than the external one. But if you are in St. Petersburg,
[Guest 2]: and if someone is talking about Latvia and Lithuania and Estonia coming into NATO, you
[Guest 2]: are thinking of a historical foe at your doorstep. So that is going to make you think about the
[Guest 2]: world very differently than you would if you're sitting in Germany. And I think time has a
[Guest 2]: similar kind of effect as where you are in that particular point in time. And one of
[Guest 2]: my daughters, perhaps it's a failing on my part, but just a month ago said, and she's
[Guest 2]: 13, she said, Dad, what's 9-11? So, you know, 9-11 is one of the defining things, international
[Guest 2]: events of our lifetimes. But for her, she's heard about it. And I'm glad she didn't have,
[Guest 2]: she wasn't like I probably would have been at her age, which is, oh, there's something
[Guest 2]: it seems like I should know about and I don't, let me go and find out about it. She just
[Guest 2]: asked me, I would never have done that. And I'm glad she's like that. And she asked me
[Guest 2]: and then I had to go into an explanation of 9-11. But to an intelligent 13 year old without
[Guest 2]: wanting to be condescending, this is something I learned from my father, who would always
[Guest 2]: argue serious things with you, but without condescension at any age. It's a very, very
[Guest 2]: tough thing to do, because you will know more than your child. I mean, that's you'd better
[Guest 2]: otherwise, you probably shouldn't have had the child in the first place. And you have
[Guest 2]: to go into an explanation, which is giving facts, which isn't giving too much editorial,
[Guest 2]: but you want your kids to have your values. And there are sort of consequences. If you
[Guest 2]: were explaining 9-11 to someone in the two years that followed it, you would have a very
[Guest 2]: different story to tell about it, even someone like you or me, then we would have today because
[Guest 2]: we realized that there were no weapons of mass destruction. At that point, even we would
[Guest 2]: have thought, right now we'll turn around and say, look at the so and so that Bush was,
[Guest 2]: at that point, we might have thought, yes, maybe they are, maybe it was still the wrong
[Guest 2]: thing to do to invade Iraq, but maybe they are weapons of mass destruction. Today, we
[Guest 2]: know that they weren't. So that point at time in which you look at something, I think is
[Guest 2]: as important as where in the world are you looking at it from? So both, I think are important.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I'm also kind of glad that your daughter asked you that question instead of
[Amit Varma]: putting it on social media, because the trend today, somebody would have screenshotted it
[Amit Varma]: and 10 years later, they would have put it up and said this person didn't even know what
[Amit Varma]: 9-11 was. Is she really capable of being a director at this museum for something she
[Guest 2]: tweeted 30 years ago? Or they would have said today, they would have said, oh, Akshay Jaitley's
[Guest 2]: daughter doesn't know what 9-11 is. Yeah, that too.
[Guest 2]: No, but by the way, sorry, there's a story there. Kids have become very cautious about
[Guest 2]: what they post. Younger folks are very, very cautious about what they post precisely because
[Guest 2]: of being mocked, ridiculed, humiliated and all the rest of it. So, you know, query whether
[Guest 2]: that's questioning, that's suppressing freedom of expression or not, or whether that is the
[Guest 2]: right place or necessarily Twitter is the only place where you should be expressing
[Guest 2]: your opinion, but that's definitely happening. No question.
[Amit Varma]: No, I sometimes think about what would have happened if social media had been around when
[Amit Varma]: I was young. And I would be like, I would have been cancelled 80 times by now, because
[Amit Varma]: when you're young, you're thinking whatever you're experimenting, like I said, I carried
[Amit Varma]: marks in my, you know, in my rucksack for a while to college, you're experimenting with
[Amit Varma]: all kinds of ideas, you're saying all kinds of things, you know, the male brain doesn't
[Amit Varma]: develop properly till you're 25. You know, which is why you have all this crazy male
[Amit Varma]: teenage violence and all of that you're not socialized properly. And there's all this
[Amit Varma]: shit going on. And we never had that pressure, we could just grow up in whatever way. You
[Amit Varma]: know, maybe if you guys knew the person I was, when I was 20, you wouldn't want to know
[Amit Varma]: me, we'd never start having conversations, right? And vice versa, for all I know. Is
[Amit Varma]: it true Ajay that you were a punk rocker when you were 19?
[Guest 1]: Yeah, I was clearly a weird person at 19. I agree with everything you said that I would
[Guest 1]: have been all over social media in truly toxic ways that would have been damaging to me then
[Guest 1]: to me now. So I'm like, just grateful that these technologies did not exist. It would
[Guest 1]: have disproportionately influenced the way I think and then there would have been all
[Guest 1]: kinds of angry people jumping at me. And this thing about storage of data is terrifying.
[Guest 1]: So systems that capture store data that can be used against you at future dates, are really
[Guest 1]: chilling the human mind. And I think, you know, we were just lucky that at a younger
[Guest 1]: age, we have said all kinds of rubbish, and it has not been recorded.
[Guest 2]: Little thought experiment here. That's the sort of, I agree with all of this, because
[Guest 2]: that's that's the obvious answer to all the rubbish we would have said that if we would
[Guest 2]: have all said rubbish, we would have all been called out for it. However, that was a time
[Guest 2]: at which there was no cancellation. So we are assuming that we have the culture of today
[Guest 2]: where there's cancellation with the words that we you and I would have had then which
[Guest 2]: would probably should have should be should have been cancelled. But anyway, that's what
[Guest 2]: we are assuming. If we'd said those things at that point where there wasn't a wider culture,
[Guest 2]: which had become so divided, and so polarized, then maybe that you would have said it on
[Guest 2]: social media then like you have, like you did in public, and maybe you would have got
[Guest 2]: the same reaction because that's what you were saying it into. And maybe that would
[Guest 2]: have led to people acknowledging that these things are said, and us not coming to the
[Guest 2]: point where we have a cancel culture, because so many of the people who are doing cancel
[Guest 2]: culture are either young or hypocritical. So you have, everybody has said rubbish, misogynistic
[Guest 2]: things and all of we've all done it. We all think that today we think it wasn't the right
[Guest 2]: thing to do. And we've grown up and that's the part of the process. But if, if that had
[Guest 2]: been a time vacuum, or sort of, if it's sort of frozen time, then, then that might be true.
[Guest 2]: But that itself would have had an impact on the culture, which would have then evolved
[Guest 1]: to a different place.
[Guest 1]: I'm worried about something else. I'm worrying about the human being. I want to use George
[Guest 1]: Orwell's phrase, political speech. Okay, so there are two kinds of speech in the world
[Guest 1]: you speak the truth, or you speak very carefully, it is a move in a chess game. It's a part
[Guest 1]: of a chess combination that is intended to influence the world in certain ways that fulfill
[Guest 1]: some ulterior objectives. The guarded, careful conversations that we know how to do as adults
[Guest 1]: in recorded spheres, such as this one, are not a complete fulfillment of being a human
[Guest 1]: being. And I fear that in the modern world, it's just becoming the only kind of communication
[Guest 1]: that people learn to do. So it has a chilling effect that there is a very important role
[Guest 1]: for the human mind to speak the truth, there should be safe spaces to be able to speak
[Guest 1]: honestly with each other to do heretical, controversial expression. And that is how
[Guest 1]: we grapple with ideas. That is how we play with ideas. That is how we make mistakes.
[Guest 1]: That is how we fumble. That is how we learn. And for all of us here, we know the unique
[Guest 1]: deadness of the prose that is written in public life on a government file. I fear so much
[Guest 1]: of the oral expression of the world has become that. Whereas earlier, we used to be hypocritical
[Guest 1]: about it, that we would speak honestly in a certain way, when there was no microphone.
[Guest 1]: And then there was everything else that we did in front of recordings. I fear a world
[Guest 1]: in which everything is recorded. It will stunt the development of the human mind and the
[Guest 1]: imagination.
[Amit Varma]: A couple of other aspects also like one aspect is that not only does your data get captured,
[Amit Varma]: and you can be cancelled later or whatever, but you also get solidified into those positions.
[Amit Varma]: I take a position X, 30 people attack me, and then I double down on it. And then I become
[Amit Varma]: associated with X. And then that's who I am. That's who I become as well. Whereas otherwise
[Amit Varma]: I might say X today, I might say Y tomorrow, I might, you know, you play around and you
[Amit Varma]: kind of discover and all of that. So I fear that just in the shaping of the self, it's
[Amit Varma]: a problem.
[Amit Varma]: And the other issue, you know, you quoted Orwell, and that's also true, the need not
[Amit Varma]: just to be careful about what you say, because it can be used against you. But the need to
[Amit Varma]: also make your speech idiot proof, because you know that there are people out there who
[Amit Varma]: are looking for gotcha moments in bad faith, who will misinterpret everything you say.
[Amit Varma]: So you've not just got to, you know, be careful about what you say, but even how you say it,
[Amit Varma]: and make sure it's not misinterpreted. And the point is, if so much of your time goes
[Amit Varma]: into the framing of your thought, then that much less time goes into the thinking of thoughts
[Amit Varma]: itself. And it's a chilling effect. It's a paralyzing effect to thought. It's scary.
[Guest 2]: Again, I'm wondering whether we might have reached peak that. Because if I look at my
[Guest 2]: 13 year olds, and my 12 year old niece, who's with us at the moment, they seem to be beginning
[Guest 2]: to have an instinctive reaction to, for want of a better word, wokeness. They're not necessarily
[Guest 2]: disagreeing with the underlying principle, which again, many people who've been accused
[Guest 2]: of, who have been cancelled for not being woken up, are not disagreeing with the underlying
[Guest 2]: principle. They're just saying, allow me to say this in a certain way. And I feel that
[Guest 2]: there's at least at that age, young teenagers, in my very limited experience, are beginning
[Guest 2]: to say, look, doesn't matter if you say it, but are you actually like this? And perhaps
[Guest 2]: it's because, and this is just thinking out loud over here, perhaps it's because they're
[Guest 2]: now seeing a lot more of what we heard about. So for instance, there are two girls in my
[Guest 2]: daughter's class who are going out with each other at the age of 13. So it's completely
[Guest 2]: normalized for them. We still have to think about it, internalize it, and intellectualize
[Guest 2]: it and say, yes, that's fine. For them, it's just fine. They don't have to think about
[Guest 2]: it. So then their attitude towards that, when that is normal, then they don't have to be
[Guest 2]: woke about it in order to just consider it to be normal. So maybe you're reaching, beginning
[Guest 2]: to reach that point. I'd like to believe that you're reaching that point. But on the speech
[Guest 2]: front, Ajay, I completely agree with you. And funnily enough, one of my girls, I talk
[Guest 2]: a lot about my girls, by the way. So I was writing an essay on exactly that paragraph
[Guest 2]: and we were talking about it. And you know, this, the same discussion came up about what
[Guest 2]: you say and who you say it to, that it matters. But that you should be free to say in where
[Guest 2]: you think you're, you're free to say something, you should, you should say it. And I was made
[Guest 2]: by my parents to read 1984, before 1984. So I finished it in December 1983.
[Amit Varma]: What a fantastic story. Yeah, that's another chapter in your autobiography, 1984 before 1984.
[Amit Varma]: So you go on to study the law. Now, did studying the law also change the way you think about
[Amit Varma]: stuff? Because I would imagine, from an outsider's perspective, not having studied or known law
[Amit Varma]: myself, that it trains you to think in a systematic way, in a rigorous way, you're reading a lot,
[Amit Varma]: it will also give you habits of research of thinking through arguments and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And if you if it, if you apply all of those habits to your study of law, you will also
[Amit Varma]: then begin to apply it to any place else. And now one way of looking at it could be
[Amit Varma]: that someone who already thinks like that, who has those habits of mind will naturally
[Amit Varma]: make a good lawyer. But the other way is that it can also go the other way, that just studying
[Amit Varma]: the law makes you look at the world more rigorously look for frameworks that you can apply and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, go from point A to B to C and all of that. So do you think you were naturally
[Amit Varma]: a thinker of that sort? Or do you think that's the happenstance of studying the law with
[Amit Varma]: all the happy accidents that led to it sort of led you to the point where and changed
[Guest 2]: you? I don't know the answer to that. But I sort
[Guest 2]: of qualify the question a little bit. And then I will give you an answer, which might
[Guest 2]: be somewhat interesting, which is it's not so much the study of the law, but the practice
[Guest 2]: of it. Because when you study law, at least the way that I was taught it, you're taught
[Guest 2]: in a very specific method in Oxford and in Cambridge, which is the tutorial system. You
[Guest 2]: go in, basically you're not taught anything, you have to go off and do a bunch of reading
[Guest 2]: and come back and discuss the answer to a question in front of your tutor. And what
[Guest 2]: they're looking for is for you to find ways to defend whatever argument you're coming
[Guest 2]: up with, which is what law ultimately is about. But that same method is applied to philosophy,
[Guest 2]: English literature, the classics, anything. So it's particularly useful for the law. So
[Guest 2]: I studied law there and this method was used. And I think it's something that helped me
[Guest 2]: in the longer term. But it's when you start practicing law that your mind starts, the
[Guest 2]: way that your mind works starts changing. And sometimes not necessarily in a good way
[Guest 2]: for the rest of your life, but it's very effective. You need to think in that way as a lawyer,
[Guest 2]: which is a very risk averse way. You need to, and in fact, you have to do, it's a positive
[Guest 2]: attribute while you're practicing as a lawyer, to be able to pass words and to think hard
[Guest 2]: about what the potential meanings of what you're writing down could be, the placement
[Guest 2]: of a comma, all the rest of it is all really important because there are implications to
[Guest 2]: your clients for getting it wrong. So you become risk averse, but then what you find
[Guest 2]: yourself doing is in your normal conversation, you try and say something in a way where they
[Guest 2]: couldn't be another interpretation, whereas normal people don't do that. They say whatever
[Guest 2]: things in whatever way they want. And if there's someone doesn't understand, they'll clarify
[Guest 2]: it. But I find myself, I found myself many, many times over the years thinking really
[Guest 2]: hard about a sentence or something that I'm writing in a non-legal context to make sure
[Guest 2]: that there could not be two possible interpretations of that. And that no doubt that changes the
[Guest 2]: plasticity of your brain and you become slightly more boring, if you like, in the way that
[Guest 2]: you apply your analytical ability. Now, if you continue to be engaged with the rest of
[Guest 2]: the world and you read other stuff and you have friends from different walks of life,
[Guest 2]: then that tempers that a bit, which sort of leads me to a question that Ajay and I were
[Guest 2]: talking about earlier is that I'm opposed to this five-year law school thing in some
[Guest 2]: ways because you're telling 16-year-olds to start thinking like that, 17-year-olds only
[Guest 2]: with other people who are studying law. So, you, your whole, not only are you thinking
[Guest 2]: just like that, but everybody, your close friends, a lot of closest, our closest friends
[Guest 2]: are from college days. They are, they're all lawyers. So, the argument for some of these
[Guest 2]: national law schools to become broader universities, I think is really strong. And Ajay tells me
[Guest 2]: that one or two of them are potentially thinking about that, but to be surrounded by, to be
[Guest 2]: surrounded by people studying political science and economics, et cetera, will make, not only,
[Guest 2]: you know, give you a different outlook on life, would make you a better lawyer because
[Guest 2]: ultimately you're practicing in the world. You're not practicing in a vacuum. So, the
[Guest 2]: best lawyers that I've come across are people who have a really good understanding of the
[Guest 2]: rest of the world and can place their legal analysis and work within that. So, I've gone
[Amit Varma]: all over the place a little bit over there. No, no, that's a fantastic answer. Much food
[Amit Varma]: for thought. And there's an orthogonal question that I sometimes think about. I might even
[Amit Varma]: have discussed it with Ajay separately, but it's about the nature of our education system
[Amit Varma]: and how it's ripe for disruption, but not in the way that it is happening right now.
[Amit Varma]: Today, what we see is all of this so-called edtech and these disruptive influences are
[Amit Varma]: disruptive in terms of delivery, how they deliver it to you. But what is being taught
[Amit Varma]: to you is the same. The thinking behind what education is, is essentially the same. And
[Amit Varma]: I've been thinking for a long time that, you know, our way of teaching, that you have ten
[Amit Varma]: standards in school and then another couple, and then these are the different streams that
[Amit Varma]: you go into. And if you're so many years old, you'll be in this class and these are the
[Amit Varma]: exams you will do and you will all learn together. And these are really notions which solidified
[Amit Varma]: in the early 19th century. And they were okay for that time. They were okay in an instrumental
[Amit Varma]: way, that you're training kids to grow up and be a particular thing, maybe a bureaucrat
[Amit Varma]: and a cog, or maybe a particular kind of person. And today, largely, they don't apply, but
[Amit Varma]: through inertia, we've just stuck with it. And, you know, so many of us, all the really
[Amit Varma]: important things that we have learned, much more in my case, and you guys, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: but much more in my case, or something outside of the system, right? So I just, and you referred
[Amit Varma]: to one aspect of it, you know, and I sometimes think that at some point at a deeper fundamental
[Amit Varma]: level as a society, we just need to rethink this whole education itself, this template
[Amit Varma]: in our head, that you have 10 classes and 10 standards, and you do these six subjects
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth. And then you go into these separate fields, which are kept separate.
[Amit Varma]: If you're doing law, you only do law, and blah, blah, blah. And even if one were to
[Amit Varma]: be able to conceive of alternatives, how those alternatives would come about is something
[Amit Varma]: that kind of beats me a little. And that's the kind of disruption I'd like to see beyond,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the disruption of delivery that okay, we'll do online classes, but the syllabus
[Amit Varma]: is still ICSE, CBSE. You have any thoughts about this?
[Guest 2]: I think there's some experimentation with this that I've experienced with my children,
[Guest 2]: which is that they've put people in, say, grade five with kids from grade seven together
[Guest 2]: to learn certain things, and they're learning from each other. I think the problem here
[Guest 2]: is at least in our country is from the concept or the phenomenon that I call the Delhi auntie.
[Guest 2]: The Delhi auntie doesn't want change. The Delhi auntie doesn't want her kid to go to
[Guest 2]: school during COVID times, irrespective of what is doing, forget about or to all the
[Guest 2]: poorer kids who don't have access to online and all of that, and are doing it, answering
[Guest 2]: questions with a phone or going to school once a week, getting a sheet and filling it
[Guest 2]: out and giving it back, but even on their own kids, because there's just this shoehorning
[Guest 2]: into thinking in a particular way. I think it's on the demand side that the real resistance
[Guest 2]: is coming and who is going to sort of turn around and say, no, I'm going to take the
[Guest 2]: risk of antagonizing all these people from whom I'm making a fantastic living by collecting
[Guest 2]: large fees. Who's going to take that risk? I don't know. But I think with the IB system,
[Guest 2]: there's a bit of a change in that they encourage analytical thinking at least in the last two
[Guest 2]: or three years of school. And more and more schools are switching to that. You know, perhaps
[Guest 2]: the change is going to come at least in that end of school kind of level by the fact, and
[Guest 2]: this is only true for richer kids, by the fact that more and more people are going abroad.
[Guest 2]: And what abroad is asking for, what universities abroad are requiring is more analytical thinking.
[Guest 2]: So you're going to have to produce it on the supply side. So maybe that's one way in which
[Guest 2]: it would change. But I have to say that this is not an area of my specialization. Ajay
[Guest 2]: probably knows more than I do.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, as somebody that has been in the machine all my life of taking and teaching and courses
[Guest 1]: and exams and all that rubbish, I've just become profoundly skeptical about the machine
[Guest 1]: that I feel what works in learning is reading and thinking and debating and exploring the
[Guest 1]: world in a more open ended and unstructured way. I think apprenticeships are a great method
[Guest 1]: through which things are learned. I think whatever I learned, well, I learned myself.
[Guest 1]: And I think whatever good things I did for other people in their learning journey was
[Guest 1]: more in an apprenticeship model, rather than in the machinery of a classroom and exams
[Guest 1]: and all that. So I'm just like very underwhelmed at the machine. I think we've tried to industrialize
[Guest 1]: something which really should be artisanal, it should be proudly artisanal.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, I mean, my thoughts are just going back to my teenage years in Delhi, where our home
[Guest 2]: was a place where people would come and go, all kinds of people would come and go, not
[Guest 2]: just for meals in the evening, but come and stay for like few days, which was very much
[Guest 2]: an open house. And the kinds of people that I interacted with as a teenager in those years
[Guest 2]: who I had conversations with, more sort of overheard conversations, sometimes when you
[Guest 2]: were not supposed to, you're supposed to be asleep, and then you'd hear all sorts of interesting
[Guest 2]: things was a very important influence in how I learned things, how I, the fact that you
[Guest 2]: had these views and views should be debated, and you should respect other people's opinions.
[Guest 2]: So not just the content, but the how of it were really important. I mean, people like
[Guest 2]: Arun Shourie and Mani Shankar Iyer and Farooq Dhondi, the journalist and Mrinalini Sarabhai
[Guest 2]: and all these sorts of people would come in and out of the house. And it was, I had no
[Guest 2]: sense of what how rich my, this sort of quote unquote education was, but it was as important
[Guest 2]: if not more as any other any word I learned in school. So I think, absolutely, I agree
[Guest 2]: completely.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, Arun Shourie, by the way, is one of my sort of when I started this show, I had
[Amit Varma]: a list of five or six names that I have to have these people on the show. And Arun Shourie
[Amit Varma]: was right on top and I got everyone else, but he keeps turning me down. I mean, if someone
[Amit Varma]: who knows him well is listening to this, kindly convince him we can have a nice 10 hour conversation.
[Guest 1]: And if Valli Kaul is listening to the show, please find Akshay somehow.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you know, when he was talking about his college years, when Akshay was talking
[Amit Varma]: about his college years, I immediately thought that if it was made into a web series now,
[Amit Varma]: not just a book, then you could have this fictionalized episode where he is looking
[Amit Varma]: into a book in a cafe and the waitress comes up to him and he looks up and he sees this
[Amit Varma]: Valli Kaul, which would be...
[Guest 2]: You know, Netflix would really be scraping at the bottom of the barrel if they were making
[Guest 2]: a web series about me.
[Amit Varma]: No, you know, I'll tell you something, Netflix has completely lost it in India, the kind
[Amit Varma]: of garbage they are commissioning simply because their whole thinking is to go to Bollywood,
[Amit Varma]: you know, not looking thinking outside the box at all. I think in fact, Prime is doing
[Amit Varma]: a better job. So actually if Netflix did a series on your life, and I would gladly volunteer
[Amit Varma]: to be showrunner, I'm sure it would be quite a success. But leaving that aside, so let's,
[Amit Varma]: you know, as much as you are a lawyer, you also at this point in time, then eventually
[Amit Varma]: ended up becoming an entrepreneur. So tell me a bit about that journey.
[Guest 2]: Well, actually, being becoming, I say this quite often, but becoming an entrepreneur
[Guest 2]: probably extended my legal career by at least a decade, in the sense that, you know, I'm
[Guest 2]: I'm not a lawyer's lawyer, I enjoy the law, I love the law. I love the work that I did
[Guest 2]: for a long time. But this sort of upbringing and the fact that I did a policy degree, and
[Guest 2]: I worked in policy for a bit, it was always there. And just if I had continued working,
[Guest 2]: I worked with an English law firm for five, six years before coming back to India. If
[Guest 2]: I'd continue to do that, I don't think I would have remained a lawyer, I would have done
[Guest 2]: something different, what that something different would have been no idea. But it was the fact
[Guest 2]: that there was more to it than the, you know, the nuts and bolts of the daily job. There's
[Guest 2]: no doubt that that was a source of incredible sort of satisfaction and engagement, just
[Guest 2]: engagement. I mean, the fact that very early on when we, you know, I think we're talking
[Guest 2]: about setting up tri-legal and all of that, very early on those parts of it, the firm
[Guest 2]: building, institution building parts of it was something that I really sort of was engaged
[Guest 2]: by and gravitated towards, while enjoying the legal work. I mean, I loved for many,
[Guest 2]: many years, I love the technical bits of drafting a complex, you know, construction contract
[Guest 2]: or a concession or whatever. And I enjoyed dotting my I's and crossing my T's and making
[Guest 2]: sure the cross-referencing was done and all of it, which is part of the job, but I enjoyed
[Guest 2]: it actually. But at the same time, we were, you know, the firm was becoming bigger and
[Guest 2]: we were doing more and more of management and the kind of management that you do in
[Guest 2]: what was essentially a startup, which is just building things and seeing what would happen
[Guest 2]: was incredibly interesting and no idea where it would go, what it would become, or that
[Guest 2]: we were entrepreneurs. We didn't think, we didn't have these words really to, we set
[Guest 2]: up right in the beginning of the dot-com bust, so not the best time to do it, but it probably
[Guest 2]: gave us a little time to step back and think and I wrote some policies and
[Guest 1]: Who is we?
[Guest 2]: We. So, we is, there were six of us who set up the firm in the year 2000. So, it's now
[Guest 2]: 22 years. Rahul Mathan and Prem Ayyappa in Bangalore, Karan Singh and Sridhar Gorthi
[Guest 2]: in Bombay and myself and Anand Prasad in Delhi. And the tri-legal came from the fact that
[Guest 2]: we set up in three offices at the same time and not the fact that there were three of
[Guest 2]: us. There were six of us plus a few associates and we, from the very beginning, we had three
[Guest 2]: offices or three cities and I met Rahul Mathan first. Rahul was the quote-unquote Indian
[Guest 2]: lawyer on a transaction where I was the English lawyer when I was still in England and both
[Guest 2]: of us thought that the other guy was vastly more experienced than we actually were. So,
[Guest 2]: we were obviously playing a good game, talking a good game, but we were both two, three years
[Guest 2]: qualified and we were, we'd been put onto this transaction that our bosses weren't particularly
[Guest 2]: interested in. Small deal and we'd talk on the phone and exchange notes and all of that.
[Guest 2]: And at one point, India was playing Australia or Pakistan in Bangalore and early internet,
[Guest 2]: I couldn't get the score and I called, I picked up the phone, couldn't resist. I picked up
[Guest 2]: the phone, called Rahul on the client's account, probably I shouldn't be admitting that, and
[Guest 2]: said, Rahul, what's the score? And that broke the ice between us and then we realized that
[Guest 2]: we were both a bunch of kids, a pair of kids with wet behind their ears who didn't know
[Guest 2]: what we were really talking about. But a few years later, we closed the same deal together.
[Guest 2]: It took a long time. We had to get the law changed, by the way, to close the deal. It
[Guest 2]: was in foreign exchange broking, which wasn't recognized as an NBFC activity. So, when we
[Guest 2]: did the FIPB application, they said, what is this? And it's a foreign exchange trading.
[Guest 2]: No, no, no, it's not trading, it's broker. Somebody wants to buy, somebody wants to sell,
[Guest 2]: I'm the guy in between. And then it took us six, eight, ten months to get a notification
[Guest 2]: to have it put onto the list so that an approval could be given. So, anyway, brief aside. So,
[Guest 2]: when we were closing this deal, we both got very drunk here in Bombay in either the Oberoi
[Guest 2]: or the Taj, I think it was the Oberoi. And we said, what are you going to do? This must
[Guest 2]: have been late 97. What are you going to do in the future? And I said, well, I want to
[Guest 2]: come back to India. I'm not an immigrant. I want to come back to India and do something
[Guest 2]: on my own. And he said, I want to leave the firm I'm with and do something. And so, let's
[Guest 2]: do it together. And in the spirit of our 17th glass of wine, we said, yeah, yeah, let's
[Guest 2]: do this. And I went off to Tokyo to rejoin the English firm in Tokyo for a couple of
[Guest 2]: years and he carried on. And then, long story short, two years later, we set up. We continued
[Guest 2]: talking. We got the other guys involved as well. Rahul broke off a little earlier from
[Guest 2]: his firm, the firm that he was with then set up. And we just, you know, whatever little
[Guest 2]: savings we had, we had a basement in which we called a lower ground floor in Delhi. We
[Guest 2]: had a tiny, the whole office, Amit, must have been the size in Bombay of this room. And
[Guest 2]: we had, it was out of Rahul's house in Bangalore. And that's how we started. And I had 10,000
[Guest 2]: pounds, which then cost was six lakhs of rupees as savings, which was put into buying books.
[Guest 2]: Other people had similar amounts that they'd saved. And that's how we started. None of
[Guest 2]: us had family backgrounds in the law, other than Sridhar, whose father was the judge advocate
[Guest 2]: general, but his clients are soldiers. So, you know, you can't, there are no clients
[Guest 2]: being handed to us. And we just got going and got on with it.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, what were those early days like where, you know, you started this and like
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned, it's common for family firms to come up and your dad is someone and your
[Amit Varma]: uncle is someone and all of that, but you're just a bunch of entrepreneurs, perhaps not
[Amit Varma]: using that term. And you've sort of started this up. And there are six of you. And I imagine
[Amit Varma]: that early on, you know, did people take you seriously? Did you have self-doubt? Did you
[Amit Varma]: have imposter syndrome? How did all that work out?
[Guest 2]: Funnily enough, we didn't have imposter syndrome and self-doubt at that point. We just thought
[Guest 2]: we'll just do this. The work will come, we'll do it. And worst comes to worst, if it doesn't
[Guest 2]: work, somebody will give us a job. None of us have had a job since so it did work. But
[Guest 2]: there was a lot of winging it. We were the most experienced of us had five years in the
[Guest 2]: profession, which is not what you should have when you, you know, set up a law firm.
[Guest 2]: So the way we got around that was we discussed things intensely amongst us. We debated,
[Guest 2]: we questioned, we reviewed each other's work all the time so that we'd at least have two
[Guest 2]: sets of or three sets of opinions if we didn't, you know, didn't have someone who had 20 years
[Guest 2]: of experience. And that's something that's really sort of, I'm sure for the others as
[Guest 2]: well, but certainly for me, the fact that I've not had a mentor, I've never had, I haven't
[Guest 2]: had a boss since, you know, I was in my early 30s. It's something that sort of really shaped,
[Guest 2]: it gave us some degree of insecurity, but it also gave us the confidence once we were
[Guest 2]: slightly successful that, hey, this is doable. But we had to do all kinds of stuff. So I,
[Guest 2]: you know, getting clients wasn't easy. One of the subterfuges I adopted was,
[Guest 2]: I wrote to one of the trade journals, trade magazines in England, from a fictitious email
[Guest 2]: address, which was a composite of the two senior partners of two well-known Delhi law firms,
[Guest 2]: composed an email address, and it was Hotmail Day, so still from hotmail.com,
[Guest 2]: saying that, oh, do you know that this associate from this well-known English firm has gone to
[Guest 2]: India and set up a firm, and you may, anonymously, and you may want to contact him. So two weeks
[Guest 2]: later, the phone rings and the magazine contacts me and they wrote a little blurb about me.
[Guest 2]: And a month after that, somebody said, oh, we read this blurb about you and we have a deal
[Guest 2]: to give you. So that was, you know, one of, those are the kinds of things that,
[Guest 2]: some of the kinds of things we did. And then through a contact, we got, we landed this
[Guest 2]: really big transaction, which was Power Grid wanted to wrap telecom cable around its electrical lines,
[Guest 2]: and it was complicated because we had to deal with telecom law and electricity law,
[Guest 2]: and we were working with this big English firm. So this partner from this big English firm,
[Guest 2]: a guy called Chris Watson, came and worked with us in our office for a week, and our office was
[Guest 2]: really pokey, and we tried to get him to do all the meetings with us in hotels so that we wouldn't
[Guest 2]: have to show him a miserable small office. But he said, no, no, no, I'll come to your office.
[Guest 2]: It's a great spot. And at that time, we had a terrible loo. And we, across the hall from us
[Guest 2]: was a Kashmiri carpet seller, and his loo was all right. So we told him, oh, our loo is sort of
[Guest 2]: broken. And he had to go across the street to the Kashmiri carpet seller's office or showroom to go
[Guest 2]: to the loo. But to give him credit, he worked with us for a week and said, look, I had a fantastic
[Guest 2]: time working with you guys. You gave me great advice and all of that. But I should stay on,
[Guest 2]: but I have to go. Because there's the results of this audition that my daughter went to that
[Guest 2]: coming out and she's possibly going to get a role in a movie. So I have to be there for that. So he
[Guest 2]: said, no, no, you must go. And he went and his daughter got the role and she's Emma Watson.
[Guest 2]: What a story.
[Guest 2]: So Chris still remains a friend and all of that. But you know, so these are the sorts of lots of
[Guest 2]: stories of this kind that, you know, date from the early times. But there was this sense, you know,
[Guest 2]: I think it's true for a lot of people who were getting more closely involved. Ajay,
[Guest 2]: it probably happened with you in government, you were in government at the same time.
[Guest 2]: There was this sense that kuch ho raha hai India mein, the economy is taking off,
[Guest 2]: there are all sorts of opportunities, just get stuck in and the future is sort of limitless.
[Guest 2]: There's this sense of Wild West almost out there that we were writing contracts for the first time.
[Guest 2]: Nobody had done a wind contract in India before one landed on my desk and I wrote a contract for
[Guest 2]: a wind farm. These sorts of amazing things were happening in the first decade of this century.
[Guest 2]: And so, you know, we really went with the flow. And there is just no question that we had so much
[Guest 2]: luck while doing it. The fact that the right person called you at the right time and you had
[Guest 2]: a friend who happened to be there who was looking for a lawyer and somebody was conflicted and
[Guest 2]: this happened and that happened. There was so much luck. But the only thing I'd sort of,
[Guest 2]: the only thing I'd give ourselves credit for is that we stayed together. And, you know,
[Guest 2]: for all this time in a situation, in an economy where people sort of brothers fall apart,
[Guest 2]: we stayed together for, you know, forever. And that's what allowed us to build,
[Amit Varma]: part of what allowed us to build what we built. So, I keep having arguments about Mahatma Gandhi
[Amit Varma]: on my show with people who admire him a lot. And of course, I admire him a lot as well.
[Amit Varma]: But he contained multitudes and one of the many things he rails against in Hind Swaraj
[Amit Varma]: is lawyers. Of course, he thinks doctors are bad and railways are bad and modern medicine is bad.
[Amit Varma]: But he hates lawyers as well. And people do have this negative view of lawyers that for money,
[Amit Varma]: they will sort of defend anything, take any side. Now, I understand the intellectual excitement
[Amit Varma]: of working in a new environment. And let's say you're framing certain kinds of contracts like
[Amit Varma]: the wind contracts you described for the first time, and that just must be so exciting. But if
[Amit Varma]: you look at sort of the common criticisms, folkish and criticisms of the law, for example,
[Amit Varma]: you know, it could be said that at one level, it's a form of narrative manipulation,
[Amit Varma]: you don't care about what the truth is, you've got a client, you've got to go with your client,
[Amit Varma]: you've got to go with your client. And in a sense, therefore, your lawyer is much like say,
[Amit Varma]: the political consultant of a political party, how do we frame the narrative, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: your audience is different. And that can have a deadening effect on how you view the truth.
[Amit Varma]: Another way of looking at it could be that sociopaths would make good lawyers. Now,
[Amit Varma]: I don't know the data on this. I wrote a column on sociopathy a few years ago, and it's of course,
[Amit Varma]: a condition of the brain where the amygdala is damaged. So your sense of empathy goes down.
[Amit Varma]: And sociopaths are well represented in prisons, as you would expect, and among bankers, I think,
[Amit Varma]: and a couple of other professions, I don't recall if the law was among them. But so what's your
[Amit Varma]: sense of that? Like, were you ever in a position where you feel a certain dilemma? Do you
[Amit Varma]: automatically, if you're working with a client, always just become the client's person and just
[Amit Varma]: see that point of view? Sometimes do you take pause and you say, why am I doing this really?
[Guest 2]: Well, easier answer for a corporate lawyer, harder for a litigator. It's a big, big question
[Guest 2]: for litigators at times. There is one sort of ethical answer to that, which is that if
[Guest 2]: you believe in the rule of law, then you believe that everyone needs representation. And you can
[Guest 2]: have a view on what the truth might be. But until you have a case that's argued, you don't really
[Guest 2]: know what the truth is. So, both sides need representation, even a murder, all of that.
[Guest 2]: That's one side of it. But the other, so that's why for litigators, it matters more. But for
[Guest 2]: corporate lawyers, the one big difference is that you're both representing, both sides are
[Guest 2]: representing companies. So, you're representing people with money. There isn't usually a David
[Guest 2]: and Goliath kind of situation. So, prima facie, you're not getting into that dilemma. And then
[Guest 2]: you're saying, you know, there are rules that govern the way that lawyers must function. You
[Guest 2]: should not have an interest in your client's matter and all of that. So, there are sort of
[Guest 2]: certain guardrails that the regulations themselves present. And also, there's a big sort of factor
[Guest 2]: that relates to what your reputation is going to be. If you play hard, fast and loose with someone
[Guest 2]: today, and if you try and slip something in, I mean, I've been in a situation where, for instance,
[Guest 2]: where the lawyer on the other side made a mistake on a certain provision massively to the advantage
[Guest 2]: of my client. And I took my client aside and I said, look, we need to tell them about this mistake
[Guest 2]: because that's not what they intended. You know that that's not what they intended. This is going
[Guest 2]: to, I didn't even say this is the right thing to do. I just said, this is going to cause a dispute.
[Guest 2]: You don't want a dispute. You're getting into a joint venture. You don't want to cause a dispute.
[Guest 2]: So, what that does is that you get the right outcome. You avoid a dispute, but it also helps
[Guest 2]: your reputation. Your client realizes that if the opposite situation existed, you would do the right
[Guest 2]: thing by him if he was on the other side. And the reputation of being someone who does things
[Guest 2]: the right way matters in this profession. It matters in any profession, but particularly
[Guest 2]: because, why do corporate lawyers get paid a lot of money? They get paid a lot of money because
[Guest 2]: they protect people's money, because they manage risk. So, if you want to continue to do that,
[Guest 2]: people are not going to allow you to do that if you act unethically. It doesn't mean people don't,
[Guest 2]: but I would suggest that the most successful ones and the people with lasting reputations
[Guest 2]: either are very, very good at managing that situation, which is hard, or they are basically
[Guest 2]: in the larger scheme of things ethical. So, I think that there is, of course,
[Guest 2]: the suits image of this, but that's utterly unrepresentative of the way that things work.
[Guest 2]: Mainly because all the files, I don't know if you've noticed, but all the files in suits,
[Guest 2]: it's one folder with one sheet of paper. And Harvey Specter looks at one sheet of paper and says,
[Guest 2]: I know what the answer is, and the deal flips. I mean, we are used to dealing with stacks and
[Guest 2]: stacks and stacks of boring files. So, the reality is quite different and you're part
[Guest 2]: of a community or part of a profession, reputation matters. And tell me a little bit about how
[Amit Varma]: this habit that you have to, you know, develop by force of reading a lot, of taking in a lot
[Amit Varma]: of information, assimilating it, organizing it in your head, how does it affect then other periods
[Amit Varma]: of your life? Like, you know, when you're not lawyering so much, for example, like now when
[Amit Varma]: you're working on all these other disparate interests and all of that, how does it help you
[Amit Varma]: look at all of these other things, not just in terms of the frameworks that you might have had of
[Amit Varma]: how you approach a subject, but just these habits that it's okay, I can read like 300 pages in a
[Amit Varma]: day, I can organize that information, I can take it in. You know, do you have any habits in terms
[Amit Varma]: of or apps that you use in terms of knowledge management and so on?
[Guest 2]: Well, I'm, you know, you've talked a number of times about Roam, and I use it a bit,
[Guest 2]: I use it very inefficiently, but I can see the promise of it. So, one thing, one thing is that,
[Guest 2]: you know, I, my knowledge management system for 20, 20 odd years was my colleagues, and the firm
[Guest 2]: and juniors who you say, okay, I remember this from that go and do some research, let's see if
[Guest 2]: there's something new on it. And so, you know, the number of times when you actually pull out
[Guest 2]: stuff and read it yourself, without some without having asked someone to get it for you is very
[Guest 2]: is not that often. So I'm having to sort of retrain myself now, because I don't have a phalanx of
[Guest 2]: people helping me. And I don't, and the kinds of stuff I'm looking at is different. So Ajay,
[Guest 2]: for example, told me about Google Scholar, which I never had to ever think about, because I just
[Guest 2]: had to go and pick up the articles and the articles were in legal journals, we knew where to look.
[Guest 2]: When you broaden your framework, and when you're, you know, working on your own,
[Guest 2]: then you need the knowledge management tools. But I was always, always a big note taker,
[Guest 2]: even in even in my early days. And partly, once I was in a was called into a very big meeting,
[Guest 2]: a negotiation between multiple banks and power producers in Pakistan and contractors in Korea
[Guest 2]: and Japan, so multifaceted meeting. And I was very happy to be called as very junior,
[Guest 2]: I listened to the thing I put up my hand made a point at one at some point, and you know,
[Guest 2]: people nodded and I was very happy. At the end of the day, the partner who I was working with,
[Guest 2]: she said, Okay, now, Akshay, go back and just type up your notes for today's meeting.
[Guest 2]: So I sort of looked blankly at her and said, what notes? She said, you weren't taking notes,
[Guest 2]: you said, you think I called you in for the legal advice, you're going to give it this meeting.
[Guest 2]: And from then onwards, I just kept notes of everything that I did. When I read something,
[Guest 2]: I write on the margin, I put do post-its and I don't have a great memory. So I have to find,
[Guest 2]: you know, tools and tricks to remember things. But I can see and I'm recommending it to Ajay as
[Guest 2]: well. I can see how something like Roam would be super, super useful. Because of the fact that it
[Guest 2]: works basically, like your personal Wikipedia. Yeah, yeah. Zoom, did I say Zoom? That's because
[Amit Varma]: I was thinking of Zettelkasten, which Roam is based on. Yes. Yeah. So Zoom is a complete game
[Amit Varma]: changer for me. And I'd also recommend it highly. So take me through this last part of your journey
[Amit Varma]: then. From Trilegal, the firm becomes successful to where you are today, like you're living in
[Amit Varma]: Paris, how did that happen? What are your current interests? And what are you moving towards?
[Guest 2]: Well, a number of things happened. One is that my interest in doing the day to day transactional
[Guest 2]: work waned. I was not as interested in drafting the contracts, I particularly started dreading
[Guest 2]: negotiations, especially negotiations on contracts, because you have the same people who are arguing
[Guest 2]: in the same way about the same points. And I just feel like, you know, putting my arm around the
[Guest 2]: shoulders of the person and saying, let's go to the next room. These are your three important
[Guest 2]: points. These are mine. Let's fight about those. And let's not argue about all the crap. And I just
[Guest 2]: got bored. It was a waste of my time. But I think a pivotal moment for me came when my, in 2014,
[Guest 2]: started then. When I was with my father in hospital, he'd had surgery. And I was sitting
[Guest 2]: on the windowsill looking out while he was in bed. And I just said to myself, you know,
[Guest 2]: I want to spend more time with people that I want to spend time with. And those aren't the other
[Guest 2]: side in a negotiation. Not that they are perfect. I've made friends like that. But that's not my
[Guest 2]: choice. I want to spend time in a different way. So from then onwards, I sort of started thinking
[Guest 2]: about how am I going to devise a strategy to not let this thing that I've created or been part of
[Guest 2]: creating down. Because I love, I mean, whenever I talk about tri-legal now, even though I'm not a
[Guest 2]: partner anymore, I will say we. And there will be no other firm that I can ever work for. And I'm
[Guest 2]: still have a role with the firm as an advisor. And I'm on the board. And you know, I love the
[Guest 2]: people and some of my closest friends in the world are there and all of that. And I'll be involved
[Guest 2]: with them into the future. But I just knew that I had to do things. And so I started creating,
[Guest 2]: first, I looked at sort of doing some policy and advisory work. And after two or three years,
[Guest 2]: after two or three years of trying that, I realized that doing through the front door
[Guest 2]: lobbying to change policies for the good of everybody is a very tough thing to do in India.
[Guest 2]: It's very hard to do that. Your interlocutors in government don't always know what you're
[Guest 2]: talking about. Sometimes intentions are very good. Sometimes people are very smart. But if
[Guest 2]: you've done 10 years of renewable energy, and they've done it for the last six months, you're
[Guest 2]: not having the same conversation. After having tried to do that for a bit, I said, look, I'd
[Guest 2]: rather not do that. I'd rather not go through the pain of doing that. Let me think of another way.
[Guest 2]: And then I sort of, that was one thought. And then as I said earlier, the fact that I wanted my kids
[Guest 2]: to have both my wife and I wanted to have them the freedom of growing up independently, taking
[Guest 2]: their own decisions, taking their own risks, and not being driven around with in car driver, didi,
[Guest 2]: you know, all of that as you have in Delhi. That was one other reason. And this is something that
[Guest 2]: people laugh about and scoff at, but pollution. I mean, if you are a rational human being,
[Guest 2]: you should not live in Delhi, if you have a choice. And then finally, my wife is French.
[Guest 2]: And we'd always had this thing where at some point, we'll go and live in France,
[Guest 2]: let the kids have access to that part of their life and culture and aunts and cousins and all
[Guest 2]: of that. So those were all the reasons and it had been planned long before the pandemic,
[Guest 2]: and it was announced well in advance and within the firm and people kept it quiet.
[Guest 2]: And then we said, okay, what is the role that I'm going to have? How am I going to work with
[Guest 2]: the firm? So, continued to figure that out. And then I landed up there and I, you know,
[Guest 2]: frankly, all the stuff that I was supposed to do, I couldn't do. Because of the pandemic,
[Guest 2]: I was supposed to help get new clients for the firm to do business development, to do client
[Guest 2]: relationship management, and no one is going to do a Zoom meeting for a vague kind of,
[Guest 2]: this is who we are pitch. So, I couldn't do anything for a while. And I was doing a bit
[Guest 2]: of strategic advisory work. So, advising people on what the implications of changes in FDI policy
[Guest 2]: on China are going to be on your business, or your investment on the power grid in VIT,
[Guest 2]: on what the potential impact of Biden is going to be on Indo-US economic relations. And the
[Guest 2]: methodology I follow is I develop a set of questions, speak to a bunch of people who
[Guest 2]: know about it, add my own analysis around it and do it as a report. It's fun work. There was some
[Guest 2]: of that. But then I saw an irritating piece of law, an irritating decision, an irritating
[Guest 2]: circumstance on it in relation to the Chandigarh Discom. And I wrote a LinkedIn post on it saying
[Guest 2]: this is crap. And, you know, or I did a Substack article. And Menaka Doshi at Bloomberg Quint saw
[Guest 2]: it and she said, would you like to, can I reprint this? And would you like to do a column? So,
[Guest 2]: I said, yeah, sounds interesting. And I started doing a column. And that's when I joined your
[Guest 2]: course to try and rediscover how I, the hint of how I used to write before I became a lawyer and
[Guest 2]: became boring in my writing. And that column, you know, that column sort of people started getting
[Guest 2]: a bit interested in it. And one of the pieces, and that might be a good segue into the next part of
[Guest 2]: the conversation, one of the pieces I was writing was on solar manufacturing policy, where there's
[Guest 2]: a combination of customs duty and production linked incentives. And I just read Ajay's book.
[Guest 2]: And I said, everything that's wrong with this policy is theoretically anticipated by the Kelkar
[Guest 2]: and Shah book. So, I, but I not being an economist and not wanting to make a fool of myself, which
[Guest 2]: has always been a big theme in my life, that I don't want to make a fool of myself, failed
[Guest 2]: spectacularly, not trying not to be made a fool of myself many times. I sent the article to Ajay
[Guest 2]: and I said, look, am I on the right track? Are there any mistakes? And is it theoretically correct?
[Guest 2]: So, he said, read it and said, yeah, it's fine. But what do you think? Grand question is, I think
[Guest 2]: only he can. He said, I'm worrying about India's energy transition. India's, how is India going to
[Guest 2]: deal with climate change? Do you have some thoughts? And I thought, boy, do I have some
[Guest 2]: thoughts? I've been working on this damn thing for 10, 12 years from the beginning of the
[Guest 2]: renewable sector. I've seen all kinds of things that could have been better. So, I went away and
[Guest 2]: thought about it for a few weeks. And he said, let's connect again. Came back with four points
[Guest 2]: to say, this is what we should do. And he said, I agree with you. Let's write a paper.
[Amit Varma]: Wow. So, this is like a fantastic moment for us to take a break and then segue into the paper
[Amit Varma]: after we come back. Great.
[Amit Varma]: So, if you want to build your reading habit, head on over to ctqcompounds and check out their daily
[Amit Varma]: reader. New batches start every month. They also have a great program called Future Stack,
[Amit Varma]: which helps you stay up to date with ideas, skills, and mental models that will help you
[Amit Varma]: stay relevant in the future. Future Stack batches start every Saturday. What's more, you get a
[Amit Varma]: discount of a whopping 2500 rupees, 2500 if you use the discount code UNSEEN. So, head on over to
[Amit Varma]: ctqcompounds at ctqcompounds.com and use the code UNSEEN. Uplevel yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit, I mean, you've already kind of taken me through a bit of the origin story,
[Amit Varma]: share where you, you know, you wrote to Ajay and Ajay said, Yeah, this is great. Do you know
[Amit Varma]: something about this field? And then you got back with your thoughts. And so how was it then deciding
[Amit Varma]: to work together? Like in the sense that at one level, it's an intellectual exploration. But
[Amit Varma]: beyond that, what is this? What was your conception of what this is going to be and where this is
[Guest 1]: going? So we set up a video call, and Akshay had a clean articulation around four steps on how to
[Guest 1]: think about this. And I come from the research community. So I know the machine of how we think
[Guest 1]: about problems and turn them into research products. So I said to him, there should be a
[Guest 1]: paper. And he said, Who, what, how? And I said, I'm happy to help you midwife it. And it's your
[Guest 1]: ideas. And you know, it's your paper, and I'm happy to help you to build it. So that's how
[Amit Varma]: we got going on this. And what were the shared beliefs in this? And what were you know,
[Amit Varma]: the points where, for example, you Akshay said, Okay, I'm bringing this or Ajay says, I'm bringing
[Amit Varma]: this. Were there areas like that? Were there different strengths that you brought to it? Or
[Amit Varma]: was it just one subject? And you said, Hey, you know, I, we both really care about this. Let's
[Guest 2]: just do it and take it from there. It was pretty iterative. I think it wasn't for me, that is,
[Guest 2]: you heard Ajay's bit about how it started my when he said, Okay, let's do this together. And you
[Guest 2]: have intellectual leadership. I didn't quite know what that meant. I didn't want to have
[Guest 2]: intellectual leadership. So I've got these four points. And now you're the scholar, why don't you
[Guest 2]: do something with them? And I'll hold on to your coattails and go along with it, which is partly
[Guest 2]: what, what I feel at least that I've done. It was extremely gratifying. The whole process has been
[Guest 2]: wonderful for me. And those first that initial period where, you know, just I had not gone away
[Guest 2]: and thought as freely about a subject for a long time, because my all the all the deep thinking
[Guest 2]: that I was required to do was with respect to a very specific problem. And of course, you bring
[Guest 2]: lots of divergent tools to bear upon that problem. But the problem is, is very sharp boundaries,
[Guest 2]: and you're using the tool of the law, right? And the tools of the law, so your question is sharp,
[Guest 2]: and you know what the bag full of tools that you have are. Now, here, the question is vast,
[Guest 2]: and everything is a tool potentially that you can, you know, there are all sorts of things,
[Guest 2]: disciplines you can bring to bear to deal with the overall question of how India should do an
[Guest 2]: energy transition in a climate transition. So, I went back, I basically dug into my own
[Guest 2]: practical experience. And, you know, I have to, you know, hasten to say that I'm not an expert
[Guest 2]: on climate change. I'm not an expert on even the electricity sector. I've done, I'm just,
[Guest 2]: I've just done a large number of transactions in the sector, in which I've acted largely for
[Guest 2]: investors, or broadly for people who manage, who need risk management. And what is it that
[Guest 2]: you're managing risk around? You're managing risk largely around regulation, around some market
[Guest 2]: stuff, but basically around the huge dense regulatory architecture of the electricity sector
[Guest 2]: and the power sector, more broadly in the renewable sector specifically. And a year or two
[Guest 2]: before that, I'd written a chapter in a book by, which was edited by Devesh Kapoor and Madhav
[Guest 2]: Khosla, in which Ajay also had a chapter, which was on the regulatory state in India and where
[Guest 2]: that was going. And I wrote a chapter on renewable energy talking about how it was like an oasis of
[Guest 2]: lighter regulation within the more heavily regulated power sector, and why it was like that,
[Guest 2]: why it needed to be like that, and why it was a good thing. So, the instincts there were, without
[Guest 2]: me having thought about it in that way, whether that this lighter regulation, this freedom of
[Guest 2]: people to do things, this support from the state in the right kind of areas is a good thing, because
[Guest 2]: I'd experienced that by doing all these transactions. But in doing those transactions,
[Guest 2]: I effectively came to the conclusion that when I did the first wind contract that I did
[Guest 2]: in the early, in around 2010, the 10 issues that I discussed with the lending bank as the 10 risks,
[Guest 2]: if I were to get into a room today with someone, I would have the same 10 risks. The locus of that
[Guest 2]: risk has changed, the degree of the risk has changed a bit in some transactions or in some
[Guest 2]: regulatory frameworks, there's a little less risk, but effectively, fundamentally, those things are
[Guest 2]: still problems. So, and I'd advocated reform a few times, you know, when I was trying to do the
[Guest 2]: policy advisory work that I was talking about on behalf of chambers of commerce, going and presenting
[Guest 2]: white papers to government saying, here are things you need to do. And this is what your investors
[Guest 2]: are asking you for. This is people who are putting dollars on the table or not, or bidding higher on
[Guest 2]: something because the risk is higher as opposed to bidding lower, or having a fewer number of bidders
[Guest 2]: in a bid. And this is across not just renewables, or the power sector, but across the infrastructure
[Guest 2]: sector. We don't know how, we haven't understood at a structural level of the Indian state,
[Guest 2]: how private investors perceive risk and how capital flows then mirror the perception of risk.
[Guest 2]: So, this was sort of having presented these white papers and on the same topics.
[Guest 2]: When I got the opportunity to think more freely about this, I basically said, you know, this
[Guest 2]: incremental reform that even I've been advocating saying, do this, have a little more payment
[Guest 2]: security. Why is all this happening? This is all happening because it's all controlled by the state
[Guest 2]: and the state does not have the right capacity to understand the problems, or to be the right
[Guest 2]: contracting counterparty or the right interlocutor for people who are doing business. So, you've
[Guest 2]: garnered this whole regulatory space for yourself, and you don't know how to manage it. So, we have
[Guest 2]: to, this is broken, and it needs to be broken down and fixed. So, I came up with these four
[Guest 2]: points. The four points were, one, that you have to sell everything. Two, the biggest problem in
[Guest 2]: selling everything is the political economy, and that's why privatization hasn't happened to the
[Guest 2]: degree it has had. So, and there is only one way to deal with this, you have to deal with this
[Guest 2]: like you did for the successful Bombay slum redevelopments, which is pay everybody,
[Guest 2]: pay them in the form of a new flat. If someone's stealing electricity, give them a connection and
[Guest 2]: give them free vouchers. But there's a bigger problem to be solved. So, don't take a moral
[Guest 2]: view that he is a thief and he should be punished. Pay everybody off. For that, you have to map
[Guest 2]: very closely the political economy state by state, who are the winners, who are the losers,
[Guest 2]: and devise a strategy to sell them, sorry, to compensate them. That is the second. The third was,
[Guest 2]: in a privatized system, regulation becomes much more important. So, you need to change the
[Guest 2]: regulators, you need to, somebody coming out of a business school or a law school,
[Guest 2]: the top law schools, they should want to go and be a regulator for five years because the experience
[Guest 2]: they get at a reasonable wage would be something that would get them a really high paying job in
[Guest 2]: a law firm in five years' time because that experience is invaluable. And thirdly, I took
[Guest 2]: a very simplistic approach to say that unless you're going to bring down the grid, there should
[Guest 2]: be no reason why any electricity transaction in this country should be regulated. If I want to,
[Guest 2]: if I've got a rooftop, you're my neighbor, I want to sell you solar power, I should be able to sell
[Guest 2]: it to you as long as technical standards are maintained. Let the government collect 18% GST.
[Guest 2]: If you want to buy power at a hundred rupees a unit, what goes of your father? So, those were
[Guest 2]: the four simple ideas that I had and said that basically everything is captured, that I think of
[Guest 2]: as problems is captured as some aspect of this. And if you, now that you've read the paper and
[Guest 2]: if you were to unroll the sort of carpet of those ideas, to use a terrible metaphor, then Ajay,
[Guest 2]: what he did was he took it and said, okay, what do we mean by making all transactions open? It is
[Guest 2]: bringing the price system. That was sort of economists speak for that slightly intuitive
[Guest 2]: idea. What does it mean to say that only regulate for preventing the grid to come down? It means
[Guest 2]: regulate only for market failure. So, you got a market failure, you know, four points on market
[Guest 2]: failure in the paper. And on the privatization point and on the political economy point,
[Guest 2]: we would, he just said, yes, that just goes, you know. So, we had a starting point of
[Guest 2]: deep agreement and, you know, I, for me, I hadn't thought of it in terms of the price system and
[Guest 2]: the fact that you need to allow all transactions to have a clearing price. I hadn't framed it like
[Guest 2]: that, but the minute it was framed like that to me, I just said, you know, you have this deep
[Guest 2]: sigh of relief and say, okay, you know, this is what I've been talking about. I just have the
[Guest 2]: right language for it now. So, that's what that initial period for me was. Then, you know, then
[Guest 2]: there's the, what I'd been unused to many years of being a slightly more senior lawyer and within my
[Guest 2]: firm was to have the ideas and then tell someone to go and do the work. I had to have the ideas
[Guest 2]: and start doing the work myself this time after a long time, which was a muscle that I had to sort
[Guest 2]: of bring out and start using again. That's how it all started. Reading your paper, it struck me,
[Amit Varma]: and that struck me even more while you guys were speaking just now, is that it's like a perfect
[Amit Varma]: marriage of two things, that on the other hand, there is this deep knowledge of this domain,
[Amit Varma]: where you get into the sector and you understand all the fault lines, and you get that sort of
[Amit Varma]: granular knowledge of different kinds of things that can go wrong. And at the same time, there
[Amit Varma]: is this broad conceptual framework, which makes complete sense. And I don't want to simplify,
[Amit Varma]: both of you obviously would have had some conceptual clarity and some deep knowledge,
[Amit Varma]: but it would strike me, Akshay, that you would have had more of the deep knowledge of the nuances
[Amit Varma]: of individual particular things that can go wrong. And Ajay would have come at it from that
[Amit Varma]: conceptual framework of free market, the price system rather, of having that price system,
[Amit Varma]: the information that gives you how the incentives play a part, and then these two kind of get
[Amit Varma]: married without necessarily stereotyping what you brought to the table. But at a larger level,
[Amit Varma]: then that brings to mind two questions, that how much was your understanding of this domain
[Amit Varma]: enhanced by having that conceptual clarity, like do things then start falling into place and you
[Amit Varma]: say, yeah, okay, it all makes sense. And the second part to that question is almost a converse,
[Amit Varma]: that you can at an abstract level have conceptual clarity that, you know, Hayek, use of knowledge
[Amit Varma]: in society, the price system is the one thing that works and so on and so forth, get the incentives
[Amit Varma]: right and all of that. But when you actually apply it to a concrete field, like what I saw here was
[Amit Varma]: really an application of Hayek's insights about how the price system works. And suddenly seeing
[Amit Varma]: that my god at every level at every detail, this makes so much sense to me. So, you know, so these
[Amit Varma]: are the two questions that one, how much is that detailed knowledge of all the nooks and crannies
[Amit Varma]: enhanced by applying that conceptual framework to it? And two, in terms of, you know, the conceptual
[Amit Varma]: framework coming to life in this way, you know, what, how was that process like?
[Guest 1]: So, I think that if you start from the Indian electricity sector, it is shouting to you that
[Guest 1]: we don't have the price system, we don't have the incentives, there's just a lack of buyer and
[Guest 1]: seller clearing around a price, and then the price sending out incentives to reshape the demand side
[Guest 1]: and reshape the supply side. The Indian electricity sector is just central planning, end to end,
[Guest 1]: it's completely central planning. The price system doesn't tell the automobile industry
[Guest 1]: that your cars need to be more efficient, the government makes a regulation and says,
[Guest 1]: the cars need to be more efficient. So, the central planning is just all over the landscape.
[Guest 1]: So, that's the first thing that is a weird feature of this field. Like many other fields in India,
[Guest 1]: there is a deep government interference in the system and a lack of the price system.
[Guest 1]: That said, this field is a little harder than many. So, I want to be careful in what we say
[Guest 1]: in this paper and what we see as the journey ahead. What we're saying in this paper is that
[Guest 1]: the way to solve the problems of the sector is to get the price system to work. And of course,
[Guest 1]: the main framing of the paper is around climate change, carbon tax, electricity sector. Because
[Guest 1]: that's a very interesting juxtaposition of the paper that we're going to have to do something
[Guest 1]: about the pollutant that is carbon dioxide. The cleanest way to deal with that is a carbon tax
[Guest 1]: and not detailed regulatory interventions. A government saying that at this place,
[Guest 1]: you will have a solar plant. At this place, we will force this industry to accept this efficiency
[Guest 1]: standard. Just let prices work. So, fine. You want to stop carbon dioxide? Tax it. But beyond that,
[Guest 1]: let society figure out what's an appropriate use of carbon dioxide in society. And then that takes
[Guest 1]: you to electricity. The most important site of the climate transition is the electricity sector,
[Guest 1]: partly because today it produces a lot of CO2. And because tomorrow, when cooking and mobility
[Guest 1]: move to electric, that heavy lifting will have to be done in the electricity sector.
[Guest 1]: So, that's the clean argument of the paper that there is a climate transition problem. The best
[Guest 1]: way to do it is a carbon tax. For the carbon tax to do its magic, the electricity sector has to be
[Guest 1]: under the benign influence of the price system and not a bureaucratically controlled,
[Guest 1]: centrally planned system. However, this is a field that is truly hard. So, now let me turn upside
[Guest 1]: down and talk about this in a more traditional electricity engineer worldview and electricity
[Guest 1]: expert worldview. The consumer is a little spoiled in that the consumer expects that when I flick
[Guest 1]: the switch, the electricity will flow and that the price will be broadly stable and predictable.
[Guest 1]: Consumers are not ready for price fluctuations. And the price fluctuations that are required in
[Guest 1]: the modern world are kind of extreme. So, demand has a very high time of day pattern and the
[Guest 1]: renewables revolution generates intermittency in production. So, the solar production happens only
[Guest 1]: when the sun is shining. And as the evening comes, when people switch on a lot of appliances,
[Guest 1]: you actually lose solar capacity and wind is inherently intermittent.
[Guest 1]: So, it is a leap for us to think that there will be a day and I am 100% convinced that there will
[Guest 1]: be a day that before we choose to flick on the air conditioner, there'll be a little LCD display
[Guest 1]: unit on the wall showing us the present price of electricity. And we'll think about it. That
[Guest 1]: will weave prices into our thinking when we make decisions like flicking on an air conditioner.
[Guest 1]: But that's a big change in society and we are not there today. For an analogy, all the way until
[Guest 1]: Nixon abandoned the gold standard, the world believed that 35 ounces of gold was the dollar
[Guest 1]: and there were fixed exchange rates all around. And at that time, if you tried to say to people
[Guest 1]: that, you know, there should be a market for the exchange rate and Milton Friedman was this
[Guest 1]: amazing pioneer in talking about floating exchange rates. It was a big leap and people
[Guest 1]: would just get irritated at what? You want exchange rates to change every day, every hour,
[Guest 1]: and every importer, every exporter, every capital flows transaction will have to think about
[Guest 1]: currency risk. And at this price, does it make sense for me to buy this? Yeah, we did that.
[Guest 1]: We've come here. Today, exchange rates are floating. Exchange rates fluctuate every day
[Guest 1]: and we've all learned to live with it. I think that similar intellectual transformation is
[Guest 1]: required in the electricity sector. So, a lot of buyers and sellers are spoiled by the very fixity
[Guest 1]: of prices and human beings always want to declutter their minds. So, you think I want to flick on the
[Guest 1]: switch and some fairly fixed price electricity will flow, but that is a very negation of the
[Guest 1]: price system. You want prices, you want price fluctuations, you want price flexibility,
[Guest 1]: but this is a very difficult field to do that. When the wind is blowing and the windmills are
[Guest 1]: making electricity and if the demand is not there at that point, the price can go to zero.
[Guest 1]: The price can even become negative. There have been days in Germany where the price of electricity
[Guest 1]: has gone to zero or to slightly negative numbers because actually for the grid operator, you're
[Guest 1]: doing a favor by consuming a little bit of electricity at that time. It's a very different
[Guest 1]: world. It's not easy to store electricity and the renewables generation is highly intermittent.
[Guest 2]: Just to button slightly at that point, I think that's the key difference in the electricity
[Guest 2]: sector compared to any other commodity product, which is that you have to consume it as soon
[Guest 2]: as it's produced. You can't store it. And one, that is changing. Two, you can still think of a
[Guest 2]: system where you take that factor into account and design a system which is still largely
[Guest 2]: functioning on the price system and providing technically for the fact that there's going
[Guest 2]: to be fluctuation in the supply of electricity into the system. What we are trying to do at a
[Guest 2]: very high level over here is to say, okay, we understand that that's the case, but your thinking
[Guest 2]: has been in the planning mode and you've been moving incrementally away from that. What we are
[Guest 2]: saying is your thinking needs to be in the price system and you need to move as far away from that
[Guest 2]: as is necessary to take into account the fact that this is a flowing commodity which has to
[Guest 2]: be consumed as soon as it's created. So, what we're trying to do on the basis of some strong
[Guest 2]: intuitions, one about the way that the market works, prices work, and the second about what
[Guest 2]: hasn't worked in the Indian electricity sector to put those two together to say, how do we then
[Guest 2]: start thinking about this in a very different way? And really, Amit, this is the beginning of a
[Guest 2]: process for us. We are learning the details of how this whole transition could take place,
[Guest 2]: but we're convinced about the direction, convinced about the fact that that's where we need to
[Guest 2]: reach. And what's going to happen over the next year or two or three or four, whatever,
[Guest 2]: is we're going to learn more about this and figure out how we can then suggest something
[Guest 2]: which is really concrete, which is grounded in the price system, but accounts for the fact that
[Guest 2]: for the moment, we largely don't have storable electricity.
[Amit Varma]: And what I'm struck by was, Ajay, what you said about how getting used to that new paradigm,
[Amit Varma]: where before I flick on my AC, I can see, you know, what the price is. And I agree that that
[Amit Varma]: is something that can inevitably happen. But I also agree that there will be a time where we
[Amit Varma]: won't need it because the price of electricity will simply be so low. And you know, you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: renewables coming in the form of wind or sun or whatever. And I think the future in a sense is
[Amit Varma]: unknown unknowns, God knows where they'll come from. Like, we were talking earlier earlier about
[Amit Varma]: nuclear and we'll come back to it maybe later after we finish talking about this paper. But
[Amit Varma]: you know, maybe that is a source that takes care of the whole problem. But what I find
[Amit Varma]: illuminating in your paper is how do you create a framework where in this future of unknown
[Amit Varma]: unknowns, you know, in a centrally planned world, these unknown unknowns might just remain unknown.
[Amit Varma]: But where you have where individuals have the incentives to go out there and to try to solve
[Guest 1]: problems, there can be new and innovative ways of sort of... I want to push on the idea of technical
[Guest 1]: change, innovation and risk taking. What happens a lot in government systems is that there is
[Guest 1]: extreme bureaucratic and policymaker risk aversion. It's a filter that kills off a lot of
[Guest 1]: the possibilities. Something very failsafe is done, which is typically, you know, 10, 20, 30
[Guest 1]: years after it should have been done. And that's the way bureaucratically controlled systems work.
[Guest 1]: And, you know, for instance, in the field of space exploration, there is a lot of criticism about
[Guest 1]: the way a NASA approaches it, because they have to overdesign it because they are a government,
[Guest 1]: because they're a bureaucracy, because failure is not tolerated. Whereas the essence of this field
[Guest 1]: is going to be innovation. OK, so I have been an excited observer of the technological developments
[Guest 1]: around solar energy and around energy storage over the last 10, 20 years. What private initiative
[Guest 1]: and innovation supported by state funding for R&D has done is nothing short of miraculous. It's
[Guest 1]: amazing the kind of changes that have come today. If you had told me 20 years ago that this is what
[Guest 1]: this is what will be feasible standing in 2022, I would have said no way. It's beyond my wildest
[Guest 1]: dreams. But that's what the great free market innovation machine does, that when there is a
[Guest 1]: price system and there are profits to be made, people take risks, people invent stuff, people
[Guest 1]: try 20 solutions, many of them will fail. That's absolutely essential in our climate transition
[Guest 1]: story. So the world is facing a big, hairy, audacious goal of getting the carbon out.
[Guest 1]: We don't know enough about the world to centrally plan it. We don't know enough
[Guest 1]: about low carbon technologies, about living in a low carbon society to think it through and have
[Guest 1]: it imposed by any central planner, even if we were willing to believe that central planner is
[Guest 1]: benevolent. So it's back to the fundamental vocabulary of having something that is designed
[Guest 1]: versus having a process of discovery. What we need around the climate transition is that process of
[Guest 1]: discovery. And that's the beauty of a carbon tax, saying I recognize that this thing is a pollutant
[Guest 1]: and we will keep raising taxes until we get the right carbon trajectory. But after that,
[Guest 1]: have a light touch and not try to have a government that is specifying the technical
[Guest 1]: detail about how society is structured. Rather, let the energy of the capitalism do it. Let the
[Guest 1]: financial firms do it. Look at the way venture capital and private equity has played in the
[Guest 1]: transformative changes that have taken place in renewables, in energy storage of the last 20 years.
[Guest 1]: That's really the template for how this story will unfold. So we should create that process
[Guest 1]: of risk taking, of making mistakes, there should be bankruptcies. Okay, and no official is going
[Guest 1]: to do that risk taking where they put up some plant and then they went bankrupt.
[Guest 2]: I'll give you a couple of examples. We talked a little bit earlier about not being able to
[Guest 2]: sell you the electricity of my roof. But that's a bit of a rustic kind of example, but it's
[Guest 2]: relatable. But it's slightly more sophisticated. You know that electricity is consumed in peaks
[Guest 2]: and troughs, right? So there are times of the day where all the industries in a certain SEZ
[Guest 2]: will turn on the switch on their processes. Now, in any industrial process, energy is used
[Guest 2]: in a certain way. Some of it must be used at a certain time, but there are other processes which
[Guest 2]: are basically sort of neutral to when that process works. So there are people who are in the business
[Guest 2]: of what is called flexibility aggregation, where what they will do is they'll go to an SEZ
[Guest 2]: and they'll say, okay, I'm going to place an IoT device on your process such that it will switch
[Guest 2]: on the power when the price is low. And it'll turn it on and it'll also smoothen out the peak
[Guest 2]: because the prices are higher when there is a peak. It'll smoothen out the peak. And because
[Guest 2]: of the way that the Indian electricity sector works, this is actually a saving made by the
[Guest 2]: DISCOM because the DISCOM is buying the power from various people at various different times.
[Guest 2]: This business model works if this person who's doing the flexibility aggregation
[Guest 2]: can share the upside with the DISCOM. So if 100 rupees is saved, he says, okay, I'll give you
[Guest 2]: DISCOM, I'll give you 80, I'll keep 20, that's my profit. You can't do this deal in India today.
[Guest 2]: It's not possible. You have another kind of situation where say Google says, I want to be
[Guest 2]: a good corporate customer. I want you to renew power to put 100 megawatts of renewables into
[Guest 2]: the grid. If you do, and you're putting it into the grid, I might not be consuming it,
[Guest 2]: but you're putting it into the grid, which is being consumed more generally and an electron
[Guest 2]: is an electron regardless of what the source might be. I'll pay you 3 rupees a unit for that,
[Guest 2]: what you put in. If you get 3 rupees for that, fine. If you get 310, you can keep the upside or
[Guest 2]: you can have an upside sharing. If you get 290, I'll pay you the difference. So this is a con
[Guest 2]: and they want to do it because this is part of their mandate. They want to be a good corporate
[Guest 2]: customer, etc. Their shareholders are asking for this. This becomes what is called a contract for
[Guest 2]: differences and then it becomes regulated by SEBI. So there was until very recently,
[Guest 2]: this transaction was illegal. Now you can say, okay, now they've made it illegal or they made
[Guest 2]: it more possible. But this is deal by deal, business by business, business model by business
[Guest 2]: model. You need to tweak the regulation to allow something to happen. So instead, if there are
[Guest 2]: private people doing deals with private people, that's all you need because these deals and 50
[Guest 2]: others, as you said, the unknown unknowns, the ones we can't even imagine at the moment, all
[Guest 2]: sorts of other stuff will happen and this isn't even on the technology side. This is just on the
[Guest 2]: business model side. You add technological innovation to this. Arguably, placing IoT
[Guest 2]: devices is an innovation, but it's been happening for a while now. You'll have this combination of
[Guest 2]: business model and technology being able to be used to deliver value. And right now, there are
[Guest 2]: so many ways in which this cannot be done. And the way to solve this is not to say, okay,
[Guest 2]: I'm now going to deregulate this, then I'll come up with guidelines how this is to be done.
[Guest 2]: And then there will be a process of verification and you will sign up for this and whatnot,
[Guest 2]: as opposed to saying just do the deal. As long as the grid isn't coming down,
[Amit Varma]: I'll just take my tax on it. Fascinating. So, you know, before we go deeper into the solution,
[Amit Varma]: I want to go deeper into the problem because for many of my listeners, and even for me while
[Amit Varma]: reading this paper, it was great that you know, right at the start, you sort of set out first
[Amit Varma]: what the problem is. And I'm going to ask you about that at two levels. One is, tell me about
[Amit Varma]: the problem at the climate change level at the global level, in terms of the push towards
[Amit Varma]: decarbonisation. You know, you've used in your paper, all these phrases like COP26, COP21,
[Amit Varma]: Paris Accords, all of which kind of went over my head, I had to Google to figure out what's going
[Amit Varma]: on. So give me, you know, a sort of a beginner's guide to this world of how people, you know,
[Amit Varma]: international community is trying to mitigate climate change. And after that, we can talk about
[Amit Varma]: the scenario in India, what's wrong, the central planning, what's wrong at the level of discoms,
[Amit Varma]: what's wrong at the level of the incentives for the private players, and how that changes
[Amit Varma]: because of the international environment. But first, I just want to understand that broader
[Amit Varma]: subject a little better, that, you know, what are the efforts that have been made, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you've spoken of our Prime Minister, you know, making different kinds of commitments and different
[Amit Varma]: kinds of forum and all that. Give me a sense of what is the problem in terms of carbon emissions
[Amit Varma]: and whatever, and what are the different mitigating steps that have been taken? And you know, where's
[Amit Varma]: India in that scheme of things? And what is the challenge before us?
[Guest 2]: Well, you know, not wanting to go too back into the past, but 1992 is an important date,
[Guest 2]: because of the Rio Climate Change Convention, where the world decided that this problem that
[Guest 2]: everyone knew existed needed a concerted, cooperative international solution. And
[Guest 2]: for that was followed by the Kyoto Protocol a few years later, which put into place certain
[Guest 2]: mechanisms to try and reduce the problem of carbon emissions into the atmosphere.
[Guest 2]: And they were financing mechanisms, they were cap and trade mechanisms that were suggested,
[Guest 2]: there were various different types of mechanisms internationally that were
[Guest 2]: suggested to address the issue. Now, that whole process, the COP is the conference of the parties,
[Guest 2]: it's the conference of the parties of the original Rio Convention. And COP26 is just the 26th one,
[Guest 2]: which we just had at Glasgow last year. Cutting a slightly long story short, there was an intense
[Guest 2]: amount of negotiation that led up to COP21. And what's known as the Paris Agreement, where
[Guest 2]: people said, look, we have to now arrest climate change at no more than two degrees this century.
[Guest 2]: And we ideally have to do that, ideally, it should be 1.5 degrees. And that not only that,
[Guest 2]: but that the world in that historically, the and even at, you know, in today's levels,
[Guest 2]: most of the of the pollution of the carbon has been generated by the developed countries.
[Guest 2]: And it's not fair for the developing countries that they be asked to stop their path of
[Guest 2]: development, the path of development that has led to wealth creation in the West,
[Guest 2]: stop that in order to solve this global problem. So, the burden disproportionately is falling on
[Guest 2]: the poorer countries. So, they came up with this, the principle of common but differentiated
[Guest 2]: responsibilities, in accordance with your ability to say that this principle already existed,
[Guest 2]: but it took the mechanism to say they will actually be transfers of technology and transfers of
[Guest 2]: finance from the developed world to the developing world in order to make this happen. Now, the
[Guest 2]: number that was talked about was 100 billion a year. To be fair, the West has been abysmal in
[Guest 2]: fulfilling that commitment. And it's not always been completely clear how much of that is coming
[Guest 2]: from private sources, how much of that is coming from G2G, government to government sources.
[Guest 2]: So, are governments going to give the money or are private companies going to be involved in
[Guest 2]: making these investments? You know, my view is that this is not going to come from governments,
[Guest 2]: it's going to come from, you know, private companies. And India is very well placed to
[Guest 2]: receive a lot of these investments, because the dollar of investment that will come there
[Guest 2]: will get you arguably more mitigation of CO2 in India, because it's cheaper than it would in the
[Guest 2]: West. But we don't have an investable power sector, or we don't have a sufficiently investable power
[Guest 2]: sector. So, that's the link. But going back to the Paris Agreement, the mechanisms in the Paris
[Guest 2]: Agreement that were put into place, as I said, haven't been followed through. So, in COP26,
[Guest 2]: renewed commitments were made to say we will come to net zero emissions by, the date has been 2050,
[Guest 2]: by net zero emissions by 2050. And this was discussed even earlier in COP21 and following
[Guest 2]: that. And to come in and to get as many countries as possible to make specific commitments in
[Guest 2]: relation to getting to that. So, that's where, you know, our Prime Minister went and said,
[Guest 2]: we will do this by 2070. And we will also make sure that by 2030, that we have 40%
[Guest 2]: renewable installed capacity, that emissions intensity is brought down by 40%, all of that
[Guest 2]: sort of thing. So, that's where the world is right now. Now, there's this tension between the fact
[Guest 2]: that there is this noble objective, which is an existential threat, frankly, you know, I think
[Guest 2]: people should be having sleepless nights about this, which is what originally led Ajay to ask
[Guest 2]: me the question to say, you know, what are you, are you worried about this? And I said, yes.
[Guest 2]: So, that's where the world is at the moment. And what India's, India's in this position where we
[Guest 2]: have a reasonably, decently growing renewable energy sector, although it's a drop in the ocean
[Guest 2]: in terms of what we get in terms of international investment to just give you one set of numbers
[Guest 2]: in 2020. And there'll be new numbers out for 2021. And 2020, it was the second best year ever for
[Guest 2]: renewable energy investment worldwide, despite the pandemic. It's about 300 billion, 86 billion,
[Guest 2]: approximately in the EU, a similar number in China, and India got 6 billion of that.
[Guest 2]: And this is not just foreign investment, this is domestic and foreign. So, 6 billion is a big
[Guest 2]: number. And we talk about how well our sector is doing and all of that, but it's a drop in the
[Guest 2]: ocean in terms of what's happening elsewhere and what could happen in India. So, we are well placed
[Guest 2]: to get much more investment provided we have a more investable sector. And that's where we are
[Amit Varma]: at the moment. And, you know, as we proceed, I just, you know, people keep sort of telling me
[Amit Varma]: to do episodes on climate change and all that, which I haven't done yet, because partly because
[Amit Varma]: there's just so much information that I'd have to take in just to prep for it that I
[Amit Varma]: haven't bothered starting. But I just like to sort of point out my perspective on it, which I think
[Amit Varma]: you guys would broadly share, tell me if you do or not, which is that, number one, you know, I of
[Amit Varma]: course, have no time for deniers, climate change is a real thing, it's caused by humans, and we
[Amit Varma]: have to do something about it. At the same time, I'm a little skeptical of some of the more alarmist
[Amit Varma]: scenarios out there, partly because they come from forces which are incentivized to be as
[Amit Varma]: alarmist as possible. And we have seen that alarmists of the past have invariably been wrong.
[Amit Varma]: So having said that, where is the line in between where I stand? I don't know. But my
[Amit Varma]: stance would be that it's, you know, the climate change is real, it's going to affect us,
[Amit Varma]: we need to, you know, do things about it. And I'm broadly optimistic that given the right incentives,
[Amit Varma]: that we are, you know, resourceful and innovative enough to find our way out of it, you know, and
[Amit Varma]: to get away from fossil fuels as we have in the past. I mean, you look at the history of humanity,
[Amit Varma]: we used to rely on water for energy, on wood for energy, on coal for energy, at various things,
[Amit Varma]: you put the right incentives in place, and you move away. So because of human ingenuity, no
[Amit Varma]: matter how real climate change is, I am kind of optimistic. But at the same time, when we look at,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the difficulty of getting these incentives in place, which is partly what your
[Amit Varma]: paper is about, you know, that kind of makes me wonder and think about the urgency and the
[Amit Varma]: necessity to, you know, get that in place right away. So broadly, would you sort of agree with
[Amit Varma]: my summation, which comes from a non expert place?
[Guest 1]: I would like to put three things into this reasoning. The first is that I am very worried
[Guest 1]: about the imprecision of climate modeling. So I think that we are all acting as if there is a
[Guest 1]: truth and we are able to make good forecasts using modern atmospheric models that peer into 2050 and
[Guest 1]: 2100. I feel that the state of human knowledge is much weaker than that. Also, perhaps because of
[Guest 1]: nonlinear science, that level of future is unknowable. There is a possibility of tipping
[Guest 1]: points of feedback loops developing. So as an example, a famous feedback loop that we should
[Guest 1]: be thinking about is that a lot of the sunlight that's coming in the northern hemisphere because
[Guest 1]: of the angle of the earth, a lot of the sunlight that comes in the northern hemisphere reflects off
[Guest 1]: this ice. Now, when the permafrost starts melting, the color turns from white to either green or
[Guest 1]: brown, and then it absorbs more. So once warming commences, the earth absorbs more and that gives
[Guest 1]: you a vicious cycle. It gives you a feedback loop that the warmer you are, the warmer you become.
[Guest 1]: The rate of change of heating goes up and the level of climate science is primitive when faced
[Guest 1]: with this level of complexity. So as a card-carrying quantitative researcher, I am very worried about
[Guest 1]: the level of imprecision of the global state of the art models. We only dimly understand this. So
[Guest 1]: the models are good and useful as illustrations. So just like you would not take macroeconomic
[Guest 1]: modeling seriously, macroeconomic modeling is not intended to be used as a realistic, careful,
[Guest 1]: meaningful forecast of what's going to happen in the next 10 years. It's illustrative. It builds
[Guest 1]: intuition. In that case, we should be very worried because there can well be a class of events which
[Guest 1]: comes together and gives us pretty bad dramatic change. Maybe not Hollywood movie versions,
[Amit Varma]: but pretty gruesome stuff. So that's the first point. I mean, I buy that. But just to sort of
[Amit Varma]: the models that we've seen in the past have often been wrong and they've often been wrong to the
[Amit Varma]: extent of being too alarmist. They haven't actually been borne out to that extent by history.
[Guest 1]: Now you have to think like a risk manager, that what are the scenarios we think about? What are
[Guest 1]: those probabilities? Can we do things that will rule out really bad scenarios? Okay, we all pay
[Guest 1]: a certain price. So, you know, imagine there is an asteroid out there that's going to slam
[Guest 1]: into the earth. We'd be willing to put in some amount of resource to buy insurance against that.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Guest 1]: We should think of this field in that risk manager's way. And I just want to say to everybody
[Guest 1]: who's listening that don't believe the climate models that you see because this stuff is too hard.
[Guest 1]: And, you know, it is beyond human and scientific genius to make precise claims about 50 years out
[Guest 1]: and 100 years out. These systems are too complex. My second point is I agree with everything you
[Guest 1]: said about incentives. And those incentives are created and shaped by states. And that's where
[Guest 1]: we hit the problem, which is that there's a free rider problem here. Any one country finds it
[Guest 1]: efficient to emit and it is monumentally difficult for all the countries of the world to agree.
[Guest 1]: There's an incentive for every one country to cheat. And it's hard to find enforcement mechanisms
[Guest 1]: that will bring people together. My third concern runs on climate mitigation. So,
[Guest 1]: let's play the game that we've lost the game and the temperatures have started going up and the
[Guest 1]: seas have started rising and climate patterns change substantially. Now the game will turn
[Guest 1]: on state capacity and state capability. So, you know, if I was Germany, I'd be reasonably optimistic.
[Guest 1]: I mean, I know they had some really incredibly terrible floods recently, but by and large,
[Guest 1]: if I'm Germany, I'd be reasonably optimistic that they'd be able to grapple with a changing world
[Guest 1]: and think about it. And I worry the most about a place like India, where the Indian state is beset
[Guest 1]: with a large number of problems, is only dimly able to grapple with all the difficulties that
[Guest 1]: are going on. And these difficulties will be dealt with badly. It could lead to high levels of social
[Guest 1]: stress and unhappy outcomes. I worry that significant parts of India will become outright
[Guest 1]: uninhabitable. So just a little anecdote last year, I think, yeah, in 2020 or 2021, the temperature
[Guest 1]: in Jacobabad, which is in Sindh, went up to 52 degrees. And there was an article in the Guardian
[Guest 1]: about this, where there was a sentence that just struck me. The sentence was that this is like a
[Guest 1]: lockdown, that nobody steps out of the house when the temperature goes to 52C. Well, we should worry
[Guest 1]: about parts of our, you know, the Indian interior, the Hindi heartland, where under conditions of
[Guest 1]: significant increase in global temperatures, we will get heat waves, we will get the destruction
[Guest 1]: of economic activity comparable to a lockdown when those heat waves happen. The present
[Guest 1]: distribution of population in India is shaped by the benign climate of the last 5000 years.
[Guest 1]: When climate change takes place and the patterns of rainfall and peak temperature change, we will
[Guest 1]: really be down to only one answer, which is population movements of hundreds of millions
[Guest 1]: of people. And that straightaway should set off alarm bells that given the difficulties of Indian
[Guest 1]: society, we don't have a working land market, people will be stuck to the land because they
[Guest 1]: won't sell the land, there'll be refugees, the recipient states will have nativism, you know.
[Guest 1]: So juxtaposing the welfare consequences of significant climate change upon Indian society
[Guest 1]: and the weaknesses of Indian state capacity is not pretty. So this is why this field is important.
[Guest 1]: And, you know, we should apply our minds and think about how best to play this.
[Guest 2]: I'll just add that if you were to trawl through all the articles and papers that have been written
[Guest 2]: in the last 10-15 years on this issue, there aren't a lot of them that say, oh, we were wrong
[Guest 2]: and the numbers aren't as bad as they were. Most of them were saying warming is a little more than
[Guest 2]: expected. The permafrost isn't as thick as we thought. You know, this is impressionistic,
[Guest 2]: but the view I have of the science on this, the science hasn't been wrong. And that's one point.
[Guest 2]: And linked to that is the fact that it is an existential threat. It's not that if we get it
[Guest 2]: wrong, then we'll pick ourselves up and we'll do something. But the stakes are too high in
[Guest 2]: some ways for us to take a more optimistic view of what the 95% of the scientists in the world are
[Guest 2]: saying. I would take a more pessimistic view of that because it will pay to be risk averse.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I agree with that. But the thing is that 95% is also not arriving at a homogenous
[Amit Varma]: place like Nordhaus who won the Nobel Prize for economics for just climate science also disagrees
[Amit Varma]: with a lot of the alarmism. If you look at, for example, the projections made in Al Gore's film,
[Amit Varma]: you know, most of them turned out not to happen, turned out, you know, but where I agree with you
[Amit Varma]: is that this is an extremely low probability event that the Hollywood film happens and the
[Amit Varma]: world goes to hell. But even if it's a low probability event, the impact is so high that
[Amit Varma]: we should do something about it. Now, where people would get skeptical is say that sure,
[Amit Varma]: we should do something about it. But even if you buy insurance, how high is the cost of that
[Amit Varma]: insurance? And where your paper gives me hope is that the cost need not be that high. You put the
[Amit Varma]: right systems and incentives in place and we should be moving out of fossil fuels anyway,
[Amit Varma]: right, regardless of alarmism or not. Where it gives me hope is that the cost need not be that
[Amit Varma]: high. Even a developing country like India can move out of it and can flourish and can mitigate
[Guest 2]: the damage, right? The frustration here is that there are many positive sum games to be had.
[Guest 2]: Exactly. And which is what we, you know, point out in the paper when we in the part where we
[Guest 2]: talk about why this is the right time for this, because the way that international relations,
[Guest 2]: way that international investment, the way that what the West is saying about carbon border taxes,
[Guest 2]: all of these, you line these sorts of things up, and there couldn't have been a better time
[Guest 2]: to do this. I mean, what I'd really like to see have happened is a conversation between Biden and
[Guest 2]: Modi, where Biden comes and says, you know, where are your numbers? Give me your exact pathway to
[Guest 2]: achieve net zero. And Modi says, but you haven't given us enough money for this,
[Guest 2]: because you haven't fulfilled your commitments under the climate accords. And Biden says,
[Guest 2]: oh, yes, but we'll give you money, but you reform your power sector to electricity sector to make
[Guest 2]: it more investable. And Modi says, yes, okay, we'll do it. Because these are all good things
[Guest 2]: for everybody. This conversation is a good conversation to be had at some level. But
[Guest 2]: that's not the conversation that's being had for a variety of reasons. And that's a whole other
[Guest 2]: story. But what we should be doing is to say, and because it's beneficial for our power sector
[Guest 2]: itself, and we've talked extensively, and everybody's talked about how much debt there
[Guest 2]: is in the distribution companies and how bankrupt they are, to sort that problem out is a good
[Guest 2]: problem irrespective of the climate transition. But it also makes the climate transition more
[Guest 2]: feasible. So, this is a virtuous cycle that we need to find a way to spin into. And we are failing
[Guest 2]: to do this because we are still captured within the concept of doing this within the state system.
[Amit Varma]: So, let's dig deep into that then and double click on the state system. You know, what is
[Amit Varma]: wrong with the way the electricity is organized? I mean, the third chapter of your paper lays this
[Amit Varma]: out in absolutely tremendous detail. So, tell me a little bit about, you know, what is the scene
[Amit Varma]: now? One, there is a mindset problem, the whole central planning thing that the state has to
[Amit Varma]: control everything and so on and so forth. But going a little deeper, you know, what are the
[Guest 1]: different variety of problems that we are faced with? He will have a better narration about those
[Guest 1]: problems in a practical way. In a more conceptual way, I think two things. The first is that the
[Guest 1]: central planning is the problem that the Indian electricity system is largely controlled by
[Guest 1]: officials. There are bureaucrats, there are officials who make a vast amount of resource
[Guest 1]: allocation decisions, who make decisions pertaining to products and processes. And
[Guest 1]: there is a lack of a price system. There are no prices that fluctuate. There are no price signals.
[Guest 1]: Risk taking doesn't happen. Entrepreneurship doesn't happen because everything is controlled
[Guest 1]: by the Mayabab. That's one way to think about what is broken. And the other element to think
[Guest 1]: about what is broken is that there is this great streak by the government where electricity gets
[Guest 1]: sold to different people at different prices. And that's just a fundamental flaw in the arrangement.
[Guest 1]: There are people who legally get electricity for free. There are people who steal electricity and
[Guest 1]: the government acquiesces. In the paper, I think we have an example of Tamil Nadu,
[Guest 1]: where there are 22 different prices for electricity. And that's just no way to get
[Guest 1]: a sound resource allocation. So, there's just so much redistributive politics that has been
[Guest 1]: tied into the electricity sector. The electricity sector has become the land on which the redistributive
[Guest 1]: political fight is being played out. And that is very detrimental to the possibility of a sound
[Guest 1]: resource allocation in the electricity sector. So, there's this mixture of government control,
[Guest 1]: and then the abuse of government control for political ends. I mean, hypothetically,
[Guest 1]: if the government controlled the bread industry in the same fashion, you'd have had the same
[Guest 1]: bad outcome. You'd have 20 different prices of bread, bread factories would be inefficient,
[Guest 1]: and there'd be 500 bureaucrats all over the country who'd be the thinkers on bread,
[Guest 1]: and they'd be thinking more centrally planned solutions to the problems of bread.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, and it stems from the fact that, you know, we've done some reform. We got a new act in 2003,
[Guest 2]: which basically unbundled transmission and distribution and generation, put them into
[Guest 2]: different government owned companies, and then said, okay, private guys, come, please come and
[Guest 2]: generate electricity. So, we bolted on private generation to effectively a state system.
[Guest 2]: But who am I selling to? I'm selling to a government company. There are a few that are
[Guest 2]: now private, Delhi, Bombay, Calcutta, and one or two others. But they're basically every, you know,
[Guest 2]: vast majority of them are owned by the government. They are busy fulfilling redistribution through
[Guest 2]: subsidies, which go through the distribution companies very often, or they are supposed to be
[Guest 2]: funded by the state, the state doesn't fund them. And then the state can, you know, the state doesn't
[Guest 2]: fund them, the distribution company will still give the subsidy, but it won't pay the guys who
[Guest 2]: are supplying power to it, because they're not voting. Right? So, that whole structure,
[Guest 2]: the argument there is to say, you want to pay a subsidy, that's a perfectly reasonable
[Guest 2]: redistributive goal of the state if it wants to have it. But don't make the distribution company
[Guest 2]: do it. It's there to produce power and to sell it and to make money, even in the public sector.
[Guest 2]: But the idea that electricity is a public good somehow, that it should be given for free is what
[Guest 2]: still permeates over here. That's one. The fact that that's what makes them bankrupt. What makes
[Guest 2]: them bankrupt, it makes them a bad contracting counterparty. They cannot give payment security.
[Guest 2]: If they give payment security, they don't honour it. There are strictures on distribution companies
[Guest 2]: to issue letters of credit and they don't. And they just don't. So, what's the consequence to
[Guest 2]: a babu if they don't do that? In any case, it's not the babu's decision. The babu is being told
[Guest 2]: by someone higher up the chain, don't do this. There is a state today, which I will not mention,
[Guest 2]: the name of, where many people have not been paid on various contracts for months and now people
[Guest 2]: are being paid depending on what kind of influence they are willing to wield in a state that should
[Guest 2]: be doing a lot better than that. Now, why is this possible? It's possible because that company is
[Guest 2]: owned by the government. That is a private guy, that would never happen. Then you have a situation
[Guest 2]: where the contracts are handed down. So, the DISCOM in Maharashtra, not in Bombay because
[Guest 2]: that's private, but MACDCL wants to procure power. It will say 200 megawatts of solar.
[Guest 2]: It will put out a tender with a contract. The contract is sitting there. You don't have the
[Guest 2]: chance to negotiate it. And the risk allocation in the contract is what some set of babus have
[Guest 2]: decided it's going to be, which is obviously going to be risk averse for the government.
[Guest 2]: Not only because they believe that you are doing us, we are doing you a favor by doing this,
[Guest 2]: but also because if the terms of that contract are more balanced, they feel that questions will
[Guest 2]: be raised internally saying, you have been bought out by the private sector.
[Guest 2]: So, your contract terms aren't fair. Even where there is a contract term that is in favor of the
[Guest 2]: private guy, there's a change in law. There's suddenly a GST that comes in. The GST that comes
[Guest 2]: in now down the chain is increasing the price of power that this guy, what it's costing him
[Guest 2]: to generate power. That entitles you to go and claim relief and get a higher tariff
[Guest 2]: under the contract. But that will be contested, it will be litigated, sometimes all the time,
[Guest 2]: sometimes all the way to the Supreme Court because again, there is no instinct to honor
[Guest 2]: contracts and there's a fear that vigilance will come after me if I pay out money.
[Guest 2]: So, you have this whole series of issues which all then, and this was sort of my learning process
[Guest 2]: in saying, okay, the system itself needs to change and we need deep privatization,
[Guest 2]: is that you trace each one of these issues back and it comes from the fact that there's either
[Guest 2]: state bullying or there's lack of incentives to do the right thing, whether it's to draft a
[Guest 2]: contract which has got a good balance of risk. Take land, for example. If there's a contract
[Guest 2]: with a state entity, the state entity is much better placed to organize the land than a private
[Guest 2]: guy who's to go and get commissions, approvals, hua nahi hua. But that's not what happens, right?
[Guest 2]: It happens now to a limited extent. So, the issue really is, these issues, either what you're going
[Guest 2]: to have is that the state reforms and becomes, has an epiphany and decides that it's going to be
[Guest 2]: the best contracting counterparty that it could be, be fair, etc. Or you have to sell all these
[Guest 2]: discoms. Which do you think is more likely to bring a result? Which brings us to the title of
[Guest 2]: the paper, it's the lowest hanging fruit on the coconut tree. All solutions are hard.
[Amit Varma]: This is possibly a little less hard. So, a couple of things strike me. One is,
[Amit Varma]: I don't know which state you had in mind, but I saw a couple of news items over the
[Amit Varma]: last two days. And we are, of course, recording this on Feb 18th. It will broadcast a long time
[Amit Varma]: later, I think. But a couple of news items recently, one is Amit Shah saying while campaigning
[Amit Varma]: in UP that, hey, if we come to power, free electricity for farmers for five years.
[Amit Varma]: And the other was Punjab, just the day before, berating Amarinder Singh and saying the reason
[Amit Varma]: that you guys don't have free power is that I told Amarinder, give them free power. And Amarinder
[Amit Varma]: said that no, no, there are contracts we have to honour with all these people. And that is why you
[Amit Varma]: don't have it, you know, as if it is a bad thing to honour contracts, which kind of blew my mind.
[Guest 2]: Should blow your mind slightly more. I mean, once it's blown, it's blown. So, it can actually get
[Guest 2]: blown more. But what I'll throw into the mix there is that in Punjab itself, a few months ago,
[Guest 2]: the Punjab government passed a law, which went through, which was unanimously passed in the
[Guest 2]: legislature. This is not just government action or one party, passed a law saying,
[Guest 2]: we are going to redo the tariff clauses of all the power purchase agreements in the state,
[Guest 2]: because power is too expensive. This is causing a burden on the population. And it's causing a
[Guest 2]: burden on the state-owned companies. And referred all these clauses to the regulator to say revisit
[Guest 2]: these and come up with a price. Some of these contracts, Amit, are bid, they are not negotiated.
[Guest 2]: The government puts out a bid and the lowest bid wins. So, this somebody has invested whatever
[Guest 2]: they have on the basis of getting a certain return. But because there are elections around
[Guest 2]: the corner, we will not only cancel these contracts, but we will put in a law to do it.
[Guest 2]: Because what Andhra Pradesh did some time ago was to refer the matter to the commission,
[Guest 2]: said take a look and see if you can reduce the tariffs. This case went to the Supreme Court and
[Guest 2]: the Supreme Court has now said, no, you can't do that. You've signed contracts. But what Punjab
[Guest 2]: did was one step further, they said, we know that this is going on in the Andhra case, where they've
[Guest 2]: referred it to them. Let's just pass a law because law is law. We'll change the contract, we'll change
[Guest 2]: the law. In doing so, they have violated the constitution. They have violated the contracts.
[Guest 2]: And forget about, you know, what's a good thing to do? And what have they done to the impression
[Guest 2]: of investors about putting money in that state? So, you just, they should not have that tool to
[Guest 1]: play with. It's a classic case. I want to add to that. There's been a phenomenal collapse of
[Guest 1]: solar capital goods in the last 10-15 years. So many people in the Indian centrally planned state
[Guest 1]: electricity system seem to think that that's a bad thing in the sense that we did a tendering
[Guest 1]: and a bidding and procured solar electricity five years ago at a double quotes high price.
[Guest 1]: And now when I buy the same thing, it's available at a low price. So, there's something wrong with
[Guest 1]: that contract. I should find a way to renege on that contract or somehow disrupt that contract
[Guest 1]: or break that contract. Whereas, absolute basics of contract law teach us that, okay,
[Guest 1]: if you want to shut down that contract, you'll have to pay them the liquidated damages,
[Guest 1]: in which case you should just let those panels continue to generate electricity because there
[Guest 1]: is no benefit from disrupting that contract. But this basic hygiene of commercial thinking
[Guest 1]: that deals a deal. And if you are willing to be tempted to violate deals, then just think of what
[Guest 1]: that does to the risk premium. And how will the domestic and the global private sector and
[Guest 1]: financial sector get involved in the Indian electricity system as vendors hanging at the
[Guest 1]: edges of a centrally planned system? And how will India achieve a giant climate transition
[Guest 1]: of eliminating all this fossil fuel electricity generation and greatly increasing renewables
[Guest 1]: generation if this is the body language and the contracting stance of a wide variety of
[Amit Varma]: Indian state entities? And this is really, it strikes me as a classic case of the seen and
[Amit Varma]: the unseen, where the politician says, we will bring prices down, we are doing this for you.
[Amit Varma]: That's the scene sort of posturing that is there. But the unseen effect is the incentives. Like,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you've, I think, given a bunch of issues with DISCOMs, some of which you
[Amit Varma]: summarise right now. For example, DISCOMs will have bidding conditions that allowed private
[Amit Varma]: power producers to not price the escalation of coal prices into their tariff bids,
[Amit Varma]: leading to power producers defaulting on their supply commitments when coal prices went up,
[Amit Varma]: as it's not rational for them to produce it anymore. Again, quoting from your paper,
[Amit Varma]: little things like what you mentioned about land, that whatever permits and consents and
[Amit Varma]: all that that has to be done, they will leave it to the private player, they won't do it themselves.
[Amit Varma]: And then payments can be delayed, they can change the law, blah, blah, blah. Also,
[Amit Varma]: you've pointed out our DISCOMs are so litigious, even in a case where they are at fault,
[Amit Varma]: and they're going to lose, they will still go to court, they will still hold the process up,
[Amit Varma]: because, you know, that's the way that they play the game. And just sort of a whole bunch of areas.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, the risk is so high that if you're a private player, you pointed out at one,
[Amit Varma]: then foreign capital won't come into this because the risk is just way too high for them. The
[Amit Varma]: environment is just way too unstable. And even private players here, like, why would you just
[Amit Varma]: get into this? And you might say that, oh, I can start, say, a renewables business here,
[Amit Varma]: or I can start XYZ, anything else, everything is opportunity cost. And you'll just look at
[Guest 2]: this environment and you'll say, nahi, nahi karna hai. So you can do it if you're good at
[Guest 2]: environmental management. If you can manage the environment within… You mean the political
[Guest 2]: environment? The political, regulatory and legal environment, if you know, if you're willing to
[Guest 2]: price in what litigation is going to cost, which means you've got to be very, very big. That's one.
[Guest 2]: And also, you know, we will point to the limited amount of foreign investment that's there to say,
[Guest 2]: look, all the big private equity funds are here. The big Canadian pension funds are here. Yes,
[Guest 2]: they all have investments. But I've seen internally, you know, I've sat on the same
[Guest 2]: side of the table as some of these people and evaluating these things, evaluating an investment
[Guest 2]: and saying, I would love to make this investment. But 30% of this portfolio of renewable energy
[Guest 2]: assets is in the state of Andhra Pradesh. And the state of Andhra Pradesh is not paying its
[Guest 2]: PPAs. So I will not do this deal, or I will price this deal lower. So the Indian guy who's selling
[Guest 2]: them their project is either getting lower value, not for his fault, but the fact that
[Guest 2]: his offtaker is not paying him, or the deal is not happening. So we, but we'll still go back and
[Guest 2]: point to that 6 billion saying, look at that 6 billion, look at the fact that we've got to renew
[Guest 2]: power, we've got all these domestic industries as well. But the question that no one can answer
[Guest 2]: is bothering to answer is to say, what have we lost out? I mean, it's a broader issue in of being
[Guest 2]: an entrepreneur in India in general. But I know at least 50 people who are sitting in well-paying
[Guest 2]: jobs in Gurgaon, who would set up a business tomorrow, if it was remotely rational to do so.
[Guest 2]: And in this sector, even more so because you're dealing with regulation and government,
[Guest 2]: much more than you are in anything that's on the in the digital world, for example.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And just beyond the problem of discoms, for example, you've, you know, given five reasons
[Amit Varma]: why these problems will deepen in your words, you know, so can you take me through some of them?
[Guest 1]: There is a sense in the mainstream that what's likely to happen is we'll just fumble along,
[Guest 1]: we will do a little jugadu improvisation here and there. And we will meander along like nothing much
[Guest 1]: will change. Okay, so we'll muddle along, like nothing much will change. In the paper, we argue
[Guest 1]: that we are actually standing at a bit of a tipping point. And the world in this field is
[Guest 1]: likely to change in substantial ways. Why? Okay, there are basically two important forces that are
[Guest 1]: at work. The first important force is the rise of renewables as a business proposition. So,
[Guest 1]: for more and more people, the appeal of putting up a windmill, putting up a little bit of a solar
[Guest 1]: generation capacity for self consumption, the business case is very strong right now. And that
[Guest 1]: is leading to the best customers peeling off. So the best customers who are so the present
[Guest 1]: electricity system overcharges the commercial and industrial customer to pay for the subsidized and
[Guest 1]: stolen electricity. Now, those best customers are being charged such high prices. And the
[Guest 1]: renewables revolution has generated lower prices that to an increasing extent, some of those users
[Guest 1]: are peeling off and saying, I'll do less business with the system. So now the system comes under a
[Guest 1]: fiscal squeeze, because the paying customers are peeling off. The second dimension of this is
[Guest 1]: coming from the changes in the global world of investment. The rise of global ESG investment
[Guest 1]: has implied that for a large number of Indian firms, it has become important to make auditable
[Guest 1]: promises to the investor that I am on a decarbonization path. Individual firms in India
[Guest 1]: are making promises like net zero by 2035, even though the Indian state is not, because it's
[Guest 1]: rational and efficient for the firms to do so. And ESG investment is already important. About
[Guest 1]: 30% of the global investment pool is now ESG and the number may go up a little bit. But
[Guest 1]: 30% of the global investment pool is now ESG and the number may go up over the years,
[Guest 1]: but 30% is already a lot. For instance, if you wonder, why did important firms like Reliance
[Guest 1]: and Adani Group pivot away from a pure fossil fuel strategy to a lot of effort and accent
[Guest 1]: on clean energy? And the answer lies in ESG investment that they would get a bad valuation
[Guest 1]: for their equity if they were shunned by 30% of the global investable pool.
[Guest 1]: So when ESG investment is creating pressures upon Indian companies to decarbonize,
[Guest 1]: that further accentuates the exit by Indian companies from the grid. Partly the Indian
[Guest 1]: company will try to say to the grid, I need you to give me auditable, renewable electricity and
[Guest 1]: the grid will say, I'm not equipped to do so. That's not how I think about it. I think electrons
[Guest 1]: are fungible. Don't bug me about where I'm getting electricity from. Then the Indian company, the C&I
[Guest 1]: user of electricity will just say, OK, fine, I'm going to go do my own renewables thing
[Guest 1]: and they will peel off. So these are the two pressures that charging high prices to the C&I
[Guest 1]: customers to run across subsidy system has created conditions where in many cases,
[Guest 1]: renewables are attractive. And the second is the ESG world is pushing the Indian private sector
[Guest 1]: to systematically seek renewables energy. The two forces put together are hollowing out the revenue
[Guest 1]: base of the Sarkari system and the Sarkari system will come under hideous fiscal stress as a
[Guest 2]: consequence. And just to add a bit to that, you've got, for example, Coca-Cola will require all its
[Guest 2]: vendors to sign up to a sustainability pledge about where they get their electricity from.
[Guest 2]: So the buyers of products in the West in particular and increasingly in India will want something to
[Guest 2]: be certified to be green. Now, that certification will lead to somebody coming up with a set of
[Guest 2]: standards and somebody measuring whether that product is green with respect to those standards.
[Guest 2]: Initially, it will be imperfect. Some people will fudge it, but that system will improve
[Guest 2]: and therefore, you will have to. And people will make promises to their shareholders that
[Guest 2]: we will make sure that everything we buy is sustainable. And then another thing that we
[Guest 2]: talk about in the paper, already saying book because maybe that's something that we should
[Guest 2]: do at some point. But there's another thing that we can expect to happen in less than five years
[Guest 2]: from now is that countries, especially in the European Union, bring into place a carbon border
[Guest 2]: tax where if you're not green energy, if you're goods of a certain kind, steel, that sort of thing,
[Guest 2]: not produced with green energy, 20% tariff, which makes you uncompetitive. So people are already
[Guest 2]: anticipating that and pivoting away from that. But query how many people can actually do that.
[Guest 2]: The big companies in India will be able to do that. Some of the smaller ones will wither away.
[Guest 2]: So there's a very complex set of circumstances that you put them all together and it's almost
[Amit Varma]: like a perfect storm. And you've pointed out that over the last three, four decades,
[Amit Varma]: people have tried to actually change the system, but there have been incremental changes
[Amit Varma]: in, you know, localized ways and not fundamental enough. I'll just quote this para from your paper
[Amit Varma]: where you write, why has considerable policy activism and investments of significant political
[Amit Varma]: and financial capital not delivered the desired results? The problem is at the core, a government
[Amit Varma]: controlled centrally planned system. Government control transmits the limitations of state
[Amit Varma]: capacity into the working of the industry. The growing complexity of the Indian economy requires
[Amit Varma]: subtle judgments that vary by space and time on the production and consumption of electricity.
[Amit Varma]: Centrally planned systems lack nuance and single national solutions fare poorly at many places and
[Amit Varma]: times. And later, there is a key line which sums it all up where you say, policy influences society
[Amit Varma]: by reshaping the incentives of private persons, stop quote. So let's actually sort of get down
[Amit Varma]: to what you are suggesting, like what is your recommendation for changing the system,
[Amit Varma]: price system, complete privatization, and having a carbon tax as a key lever that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: drives everyone's incentives are sort of the three fronts of it. So tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: each of those and how, paint a picture of how the system would then function.
[Guest 1]: So you start at the problem of the climate transition, we consider it inevitable that
[Guest 1]: there will be a time where India has to get more worried about carbon emissions. Prime Minister
[Guest 1]: Narendra Modi has promised that India will come to net zero by 2070. Net zero is actually a pretty
[Guest 1]: hair-raising promise. Zero. Zero is a very small number. It's net zero. It's not a low amount of
[Guest 1]: emissions. It is on net, no emissions. It's staggering to think of this landscape without
[Amit Varma]: fossil fuels, without coal, without. Yeah, but you know, I can imagine a comic strip on this,
[Amit Varma]: that Biden comes to Modi and says, give me a number. And Modi says 56 inches. And Biden says,
[Amit Varma]: no, not that number. Give me a better number. And then advisor whispers into his ears and he says,
[Amit Varma]: okay, net zero by when will I be dead by 2070? It's easy to do, right? Sorry, sorry, continue.
[Guest 1]: I couldn't help that. Yeah. So India will come under pressure and we'll need to figure out
[Guest 1]: pathways to reduction of carbon emissions. Well, how will that happen? At present, the paradigm is
[Guest 1]: government will order this and order that. So there'll just be a whole bunch of centrally
[Guest 1]: planned instructions to various industries. Well, that's very expensive in terms of welfare. The
[Guest 1]: overall cost of adaptation for the economy will be high. That any centrally planned system imposes
[Guest 1]: a higher cost to get the same job done. We argue that the way to get that same job done is a carbon
[Guest 1]: tax. So yes, you want to bring down carbon emissions, tax them and let the private sector
[Guest 1]: figure out the cost minimizing places where you can emit less carbon. So we have no doubt that
[Guest 1]: there are pockets of society where it is incredibly efficient to use coal. They should do it because
[Guest 1]: they're willing to pay more for the coal, even after a reasonably high tax rate, and they should
[Guest 1]: do it. And there'll be other places where people will say, you know, at this price of coal, I'm
[Guest 1]: better off changing over to something different. And so all over the country, these local decisions
[Guest 1]: will be made in terms of production and consumption and how the economy works. And that's
[Guest 1]: our argument in favor of the carbon tax. So that's the first element. The second element is the
[Guest 1]: electricity system. When we tax fossil fuels, cooking and mobility, energy requirements will
[Guest 1]: come into electrical solutions. So the demand for electricity will grow and the overall electricity
[Guest 1]: sector will need to become large. And the electricity sector is an important emitter of
[Guest 1]: carbon dioxide. The same carbon tax will need to play through in terms of reshaping the resource
[Guest 1]: allocation of the electricity sector. And the beauty of this approach is the carbon tax
[Guest 1]: simultaneously fixes both supply and demand. A lot of present thinking in the electricity sector in
[Guest 1]: India tends to be supply centric. We kind of think demand cannot be touched. Demand is inflexible.
[Guest 1]: Demand is incapable of thinking and adapting. No, it's a question of price, that when prices
[Guest 1]: fluctuate by space and time, this will create incentives for people to change their behavior.
[Guest 1]: Similarly, we think high intraday price fluctuations create market-based incentives
[Guest 1]: for storage and market-based incentives to change consumption patterns. So when should you run a
[Guest 1]: shift? Maybe the right time to run a shift is deep in the night when the electricity is cheap
[Guest 1]: in the present paradigm or in the middle of the day when the sun is shining. These kinds of
[Guest 1]: decisions will happen both on supply and demand side. So that's the second critical building
[Guest 1]: block, which is that the carbon tax will play through into the electricity sector. And that's
[Guest 1]: how the entire reshaping will be done. So this is our big picture of how to think about this
[Guest 1]: whole thing. And so I want to be careful about the word transmission, because in this field,
[Guest 1]: it means electricity transmission. But there's a useful metaphor in the phrase climate policy
[Guest 1]: transmission, which is analogous to monetary policy transmission, that how do you get your
[Guest 1]: work done? The climate policy transmission runs through carbon tax and then electricity sector.
[Guest 1]: You need both to work. The electricity sector needs to be placed on a foundation of the price
[Guest 1]: system so that when a carbon tax goes up, the price system will respond. At present,
[Guest 1]: the electricity sector does not work through the price system. So even if you introduce a carbon
[Guest 1]: tax, that heavy lifting of adaptation by buyers and sellers will not happen.
[Amit Varma]: Now, one response that people could have to say, and I'll quickly kind of sum up,
[Amit Varma]: and you can tell me if I'm summing it up right, where what you're essentially saying is that,
[Amit Varma]: look, we have to move in a particular direction. This is a direction we have to move in,
[Amit Varma]: you know, more renewables, bring down carbon emissions, make it net zero as
[Amit Varma]: great Prime Minister promised. And we can't do it in the current system, because the incentives
[Amit Varma]: are just all over the place. You know, discoms mess up in their contracts and putting too much
[Amit Varma]: risk on private parties and unjustified litigation in bad incentives. You know,
[Amit Varma]: they're treated in a partisan way by regulators and courts, so private parties don't get justice.
[Amit Varma]: They respond to political incentives, free power for so and so and blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: All that is fine. So the argument then is that, look, we have to privatize completely,
[Amit Varma]: let the price system have its way, the same way it does in bread, as you said, or so many other
[Amit Varma]: things. Everything that really works in our lives today, is because there is a price system in play,
[Amit Varma]: and people are responding to incentives to make our lives better. And everything that is
[Amit Varma]: dysfunctional about India is where at some level, there is a problem, and the price system isn't
[Amit Varma]: allowed to have its way. Now, a question that would commonly come up, especially in the popular
[Amit Varma]: discourse, would be that you want to privatize everything? That won't greedy capitalists come
[Amit Varma]: in and the Adani and Ambani's come in and charge insane amounts of money. And you know, it is okay
[Amit Varma]: for the elites and all of that. But you're basically handing the company over to the
[Amit Varma]: corporates. In some sense, some of the, you know, criticisms which were raised against the farm
[Amit Varma]: bills, which we had a very popular episode on. How does one tackle that populism? I think at the
[Amit Varma]: first level of winning the battle is not so much a question of winning it in terms of persuading
[Amit Varma]: policymakers and politicians, but winning it in terms of winning the popular narrative,
[Amit Varma]: because that itself sets the incentives right then for the politicians and the bureaucrats.
[Guest 2]: We think even on that the narrative is beginning to move. We finally sold Air India,
[Guest 2]: that finally Air India is in private hands. And there is as far as the central government
[Guest 2]: is concerned, there is a privatization or an asset disposal program that's on board.
[Guest 2]: But there's good reason to believe that as far as the central government is concerned,
[Guest 2]: they are not opposed to privatizing the discoms, because they are regularly called upon to bail
[Guest 2]: out the states in this. And it's the locus of the problem, therefore, lies in the states.
[Guest 2]: So, you have to create, therefore, the right incentive for a state to do this. And you have
[Guest 2]: to do it by showing them that there is either money to be had in making the transition,
[Guest 2]: or that there is money to be had post the transition. And that is why we've talked
[Guest 2]: about a state-by-state approach, not just in terms of dealing with the political economy in
[Guest 2]: terms of individual people, but also in terms of the government itself or the people within
[Guest 2]: government who stand to lose under those circumstances. So, I think we think that,
[Guest 2]: you know, the issue on privatization isn't as bad as it used to be. That's number one.
[Guest 2]: Number two, one of the market failures that you're going to have to correct for through regulation
[Guest 2]: is competition. So, the competition will come through two ways, one through the general
[Guest 2]: competition law. And secondly, the new regime of regulation that you have for electricity in
[Guest 2]: a largely privatized world will also have some amount of competition control done through it.
[Guest 2]: I mean, that goes into a very complex issue of the overlapping powers of regulators. But in
[Guest 2]: some areas, it's good to have overlapping powers of regulators, because on the one hand, you've got
[Guest 2]: deep sectoral knowledge about how competition plays out in this sector. On the other hand,
[Guest 2]: you've got the general principles of competition, and, you know, how that should work at the level
[Guest 2]: of the economy. So, a little bit of competitive competition regulation, if you like, is possibly
[Guest 2]: not such a bad thing. So, that's the other answer to that. But, you know, it is still a coconut tree.
[Guest 1]: There's no question about that. I want to add to that, it does not have to be a monolithic
[Guest 1]: industry with two companies. The bottleneck is rule of law and the behavior of the state system
[Guest 1]: and the regulatory capacity. So, when regulators have arbitrary power and are capricious,
[Guest 1]: and the rule of law is absent, then for a smaller firm, this is a deterrent. For a foreign firm,
[Guest 1]: this is a deterrent. And then we end up with a collapse into a small market with
[Guest 1]: a very small number of players. So, again, the machinery of this paper is key, that if
[Guest 1]: we get the state system out of this game, and you are not in a centrally planned world,
[Guest 1]: and we actually build regulatory capacity and set regulators in motion in a good way, as is
[Guest 1]: described in the paper, and this is drawing on the larger arc of the development of regulatory
[Guest 1]: theory and public administration concepts on regulation in India. So, as you know,
[Guest 1]: there has been considerable progress in thinking, though not acting, about how to make financial
[Guest 1]: regulators work properly. And so there's a lot of knowledge on how to make regulators work
[Guest 1]: correctly. And you bring that knowledge into the construction of regulators in India.
[Guest 1]: Then we are offering many, many private people profit opportunities. It can be very local.
[Guest 1]: It doesn't have to be monstrous. It can be, I'm sitting here in Amravati and I'm seeing this
[Guest 1]: opportunity and I'll build one small storage system or I have one small generation opportunity
[Guest 1]: here and so on. So, there'll be many, many elements of the energy all across the system.
[Guest 1]: So, the reason why we are criticising this sector as having two giant companies is the
[Guest 1]: extent of government domination and the lack of rule of law and the failures of how regulators
[Guest 1]: work. So, in a sense, the Electricity Act was a very nice achievement in the early 2000s,
[Guest 1]: but it predated the modern development of thinking about regulators and regulatory theory
[Guest 1]: and the public administration about regulation that has taken place in India in the last 20 years.
[Guest 1]: Today, the intelligence in India knows more about regulation. We understand the failures
[Guest 1]: of regulation. We know how to construct regulators. And today that knowledge set
[Amit Varma]: is ready and it can be done right. So, one important point I just want to kind
[Amit Varma]: of clarify for listeners is that when Ajay and Akshay talk of privatisation and the price system,
[Amit Varma]: they don't mean a random anarchic free-for-all. In fact, that section on building regulatory
[Amit Varma]: capacity is a key section of your paper where you point out, for example, that regulation should
[Amit Varma]: only focus on market failure. You point out the four different kinds of market failure.
[Amit Varma]: You also talk about how it takes three hands to clap, which is such a nice image. And you talk
[Amit Varma]: about the different ways in which you sort of build that kind of regulatory capacity and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, as far as people worried about high prices and so on, I would say that, look,
[Amit Varma]: you know, look at every area of your life around you where the price system is allowed to function.
[Amit Varma]: Look at bread, you know, bread is by and large, it is affordable and supply is regular. And it is,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and why should not that, and that is really kind of the case with everything else.
[Amit Varma]: So, why not with electricity as well, where some of us just take failure for granted. And this is,
[Amit Varma]: in fact, something the Prime Minister should also sort of take to heart because one of the
[Amit Varma]: stories about him, which I often, which I've told a couple of times on the show is a friend of his,
[Amit Varma]: a friend of Mr. Modi's who had worked with him in Gujarat. She was at a gathering at his house in
[Amit Varma]: circa 2007 or whatever. And he told the story about his childhood, about how his mother was
[Amit Varma]: ill one day, and she was sweating and feeling hot and he went to switch on the fan and he found
[Amit Varma]: there was no electricity. And as he told the story, he started crying. And, you know, for us
[Amit Varma]: in the big cities in Bombay, Delhi, electricity is something we can take for granted that we're
[Amit Varma]: going to get power all day. That is simply not the case for most of the country. And,
[Amit Varma]: well, that's also a huge failure. And that goes back exactly to the points that you're making.
[Amit Varma]: The other key point that you've made, which I think deserves to be underscored, is the
[Amit Varma]: localization, the local thinking, that even if you build the system, you don't have to do it,
[Amit Varma]: you know, where centrally the PMO will pass an order for the whole country, sub-privatize,
[Amit Varma]: Karo, price system, Karo. But you can do it state by state, allow different states to experiment
[Amit Varma]: at a local level and to sort of compete with each other. Have I kind of summed that up?
[Guest 2]: That's a point worth underscoring a little bit from a couple of different perspectives. One is
[Guest 2]: that it isn't legally possible for the central government to sort of have a diktat to say you
[Guest 2]: need to do that. It can only be done through, if it wants to be involved, it can only do it
[Guest 2]: through a system of incentives, that we will give you money to do this if you do that. And to some
[Guest 2]: extent, some of the bailing out of the discoms within the states has been done on the basis,
[Guest 2]: they will give you this money if you do this reform. And in some cases, a little bit of reform
[Guest 2]: has happened. In other cases, it's still not been done. But it's very difficult for some of the
[Guest 2]: central government to pull the plug and to say, okay, we're going to let you run into the ground
[Guest 2]: because the state will turn around and say, we want to give you electricity, but the central
[Guest 2]: government isn't doing it. That's number one. And secondly, when we talk about central planning,
[Guest 2]: the central planning isn't really, we don't mean that there is one central planner,
[Guest 2]: but there are series of central planners all through the system. There are central planners
[Guest 2]: in each state, there are central planners for transmission versus for distribution. So,
[Guest 2]: you put together the regulatory and state decision making apparatus, and you could remove all the
[Guest 2]: individual decision makers, and it would be a completely centrally planned system. So, the point
[Guest 2]: being that this is not a willing buyer and a willing seller doing a deal. This is a, because
[Guest 2]: people also say, but what do you mean price system? There's a price, there's a bid, somebody
[Guest 2]: bids on a power purchase agreement, and they win the bid, and the bid is at 2 rupees 50 paisa,
[Guest 2]: and they supply power that. But that is not what we mean by the price system. That is the
[Guest 2]: determination of a long term of the price of electricity on a long term contract, as opposed
[Guest 2]: to the day to day adjustment of prices that could take place in a system where private guys were
[Guest 2]: doing deals with other private guys. So, there's a big difference, you know, in those two ideas.
[Guest 1]: And I just want to underline that we say carbon tax, the price of fossil fuels should go up,
[Guest 1]: subsidies on electricity should go away, prices on electricity should go up,
[Guest 1]: prices of electricity should fluctuate through the day. So, there will be some 6 pm surge at
[Guest 1]: which your use of the air conditioner will be rather expensive. Well, there is an alternative,
[Guest 1]: which is a centrally planned climate transition. If the government goes around giving orders
[Guest 1]: that there will be a solar plant here and there will be this ban on use of coal by this industry
[Guest 1]: there, that will also impose welfare costs on society. They'll just be concealed. So, you won't
[Guest 1]: see it as a change in prices and damage to GDP and the incomes of the people that came about
[Guest 1]: because there was a detailed regulatory restriction that was introduced by the government. But the
[Guest 1]: costs are there. The climate transition will introduce costs upon society. The only question
[Guest 1]: is, do you want to pay more or do you want to pay less? So, this is the lowest fruit of the
[Guest 1]: coconut tree. A centrally planned climate transition will always be more expensive than a
[Guest 1]: climate transition that is implemented through the price system where thousands of intelligent,
[Guest 1]: self-interested people all around the country are thinking and acting and finding clever solutions
[Guest 2]: at every place that they are. There's a technical issue that bears mention over here, which is that
[Guest 2]: because of the fact, as we mentioned earlier, because of the fact that you can't store large
[Guest 2]: amounts of electricity at the moment, it's not that you can produce it, wait for a good price,
[Guest 2]: etc. So, there's going to be some adjustments that need to be made between what you and I might
[Guest 2]: otherwise conceive of as a completely free system. There may need to be some amount of
[Guest 2]: systems operation management, which might have to be done by a central entity, which
[Guest 2]: could potentially be owned by all the participants in the power sector together, but which is
[Guest 2]: performing a public good. It's saying, I will not allow the dispatch of that plant at this point in
[Guest 2]: time, even though it's a good price for you to do it at, because of the fact that the grid is weak
[Guest 2]: there, and there's going to be a problem. But it's only on the basis of on technical grounds.
[Guest 2]: You may need to have a few power plants. This is just one of the solutions that you could have.
[Guest 2]: A few power plants that are sitting around relatively idle, that come into play when
[Guest 2]: they are required to be brought into play. And that is a cost that the entire system pays through
[Guest 2]: some sort of charge. So, the way I'm beginning to start thinking of this is that you may retain
[Guest 2]: some amount of central planning, which can also be diluted from government and made more cooperative,
[Guest 2]: say 10% of the system to allow 90% of the system to work within the price system.
[Guest 2]: And that's okay. But at the moment, what we've got is we've got 90% in this thing for 10%,
[Guest 2]: which might be in the price system. And in fact, by coincidence, 10% is the amount of money that
[Guest 2]: is the amount of electricity that is traded on the electricity exchanges. So, that's exactly
[Amit Varma]: what we have at the moment. So, here's a question. At a conceptual level, I absolutely, obviously
[Amit Varma]: agree with you. Everything just makes so much sense, it falls into place. Are there concrete
[Amit Varma]: examples of A, such systems in play elsewhere in the world and other advanced countries and
[Amit Varma]: two, more importantly, such transitions that have been that might have been made from a status
[Amit Varma]: system like ours to one which respects the price system and then begins to work better? Because
[Amit Varma]: once you know, you can point to examples of such things actually working elsewhere,
[Guest 2]: it becomes a far easier sell, doesn't it? Yes, I mean, there are some examples. The
[Guest 2]: most prominent examples are the UK and California, both of which have had enormous problems
[Guest 2]: in the functioning of a market system in the way that it existed. Now, there's a lot of detail as
[Guest 2]: to why those problems arose. And, you know, you'll have seen that the prices in Europe,
[Guest 2]: this winter got of electricity went up significantly. And there were, you know,
[Guest 2]: there were complaints about it, etc. But these are places where for large amounts of the time,
[Guest 2]: and for a fairly long period of time, the price system effectively has worked. There have been
[Guest 2]: been periods of problems where the problems have been caused because of exceptional circumstances.
[Guest 2]: So, the point is not to measure that what we achieved, what we've got today against an ideal
[Guest 2]: that could exist, but to measure what we've got today against what they've got in those places
[Guest 2]: where you can choose your provider, you can change your provider. And that itself will
[Guest 2]: be an incentive to the provider to give you a better price and to function better.
[Guest 2]: One of the issues is that in a situation which is largely fossil fuel based, your price is
[Guest 2]: significantly dependent on the price of the fuel. And that's an extra cost. If you've got a mainly
[Guest 2]: renewables based system with storage and with a few plants that perhaps are acting as backup,
[Guest 2]: you have got a system where the marginal cost of power is close to zero. So, you are not going to
[Guest 2]: going to have that degree of fluctuation as you might have in a system which is more fuel based.
[Amit Varma]: One of the heartening sort of things about your paper was a section that addresses
[Amit Varma]: how feasible these changes are. And you've pointed out that there are six important reasons to
[Amit Varma]: believe that while we have been satisfied with incremental changes all along that these,
[Amit Varma]: you know, wide ranging changes can actually happen today. I won't ask you to sort of
[Amit Varma]: go into each of those in detail, you know, listeners can just download the paper and read
[Amit Varma]: that, hopefully. But in general, when you have been talking to policymakers or politicians and
[Amit Varma]: so on, what's the kind of response that you've got? Like, how likely, for example, let's say,
[Amit Varma]: I'll sort of ask you to speculate, but you have all the information, you have the best possible
[Amit Varma]: information you need to actually speculate on this. How likely is this to actually be
[Amit Varma]: implemented on a scale of zero to 10 by say, 2020, 2027, five years from now?
[Guest 2]: Very low, very low chance of it being implemented. But you need one state, you need to have one
[Guest 2]: state that has a vision of what its electricity sector could look like in the context of a climate
[Guest 2]: transition. And, you know, take the four industrialized, most industrialized states,
[Guest 2]: Maharashtra, Gujarat, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka, they all stand to lose, their industries stand
[Guest 2]: to lose if they aren't in a more green energy environment, as we were talking about earlier,
[Guest 2]: because they are exporters, people will stop buying their products, or they'll have taxes
[Guest 2]: imposed upon them. So, there's a good reason for them to potentially look into doing it.
[Guest 2]: Some states might want to do it because they want to have a target that is well before 2070,
[Guest 2]: and they want to score political points there. But I'm most heartened by a specific development
[Guest 2]: that's happening under the aegis of the Paris Agreement and COP26, which is that a deal has
[Guest 2]: been struck between South Africa, on the one hand, and the EU, the US and France and Germany
[Guest 2]: in the individual capacity, by which $8.5 billion is going to be given to South Africa to move from
[Guest 2]: being 80% fossil fuel to much more renewables based over a certain period of time. That's in
[Guest 2]: an MOU phase now, in two years' time, they'll come out with details, there'll be lots of problems,
[Guest 2]: maybe it'll take five years to happen. But there's a deal where if a state could conceive of a plan
[Guest 2]: based along the lines of the ideas that we have in this paper, a state could go with that to the EU
[Guest 2]: and to other such people in the world, to John Kerry's team, etc, and say, look, we've got this
[Guest 2]: plan. Can you find us some money to finance this? Now, that money has to go through the central
[Guest 2]: governments, you know, foreign money can't go directly to a state government. But then if that
[Guest 2]: were to, if the EU were to go to the central government and say, look, you're already pro
[Guest 2]: privatisation, you're already pro a lot of these ideas, you've got these commitments internationally,
[Guest 2]: which you've made, the states have not made, we've got a good, we've seen a good plan for this state,
[Guest 2]: we want to finance that, allow it to happen. If that then happens, and you get one state,
[Guest 2]: one state happens, it's a success, you find money coming in for to enable the transition to happen.
[Guest 2]: And then you have potentially investment because that transition has happened. And then you might
[Guest 2]: have an effect on other states. As I say this, I realised that it's extremely speculative, and it's
[Guest 2]: the chances of it happening are very small, which is why that's how I started my answer to your
[Guest 2]: question. But this is the one of the most plausible paths potentially that I see.
[Guest 1]: I don't agree with you at all.
[Unknown]: Okay.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, I think that we are at the dying phases of the old paradigm. The old paradigm is past its
[Guest 1]: sell by date. And there are inexorable pressures that are messing with the old paradigm. And
[Guest 1]: every year, the pressure on the old system gets worse. So there will be a market for ideas. And
[Guest 1]: there will be many, many attempts all across the country, different, different states will try
[Guest 1]: different, different things. And there will be many experiments. And I think, in the end,
[Guest 1]: we will end up with this kind of answer. I think we are at the cusp of that transformation.
[Guest 1]: Sentence in the paper is that men and nations will do the right thing after trying every
[Amit Varma]: reasonable alternative.
[Amit Varma]: People and nations, you got to watch out for this kind of thing.
[Guest 1]: I'm on the original Churchill text.
[Guest 1]: Okay.
[Guest 1]: Okay. So I think that we are at a transformative point in the story of this field,
[Guest 1]: that there is a state control system, and it is trying to adapt what best it can.
[Guest 1]: But there is just so many things going wrong under its watch. And finally, as Akshay said,
[Guest 1]: if you are Gujarat, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, the very GDP of these states
[Guest 1]: is exposed to good quality, reliable electricity and export markets.
[Guest 1]: And the ESG world matters to the companies in these states. So all those forces
[Guest 1]: are coming together in these four states. And there will also be some other states
[Guest 1]: that are facing this similar mix.
[Guest 2]: I don't know how much you believe in this yourself, but you don't have to worry. I'm
[Guest 2]: still going to continue working with you on this despite that, despite my relative pessimism.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, even though you disagreed with each other, my instinct is to agree with both of
[Amit Varma]: you in this way that, you know, as that old cliche goes, that some of us tend to overestimate the
[Amit Varma]: short term and underestimate the long term. And I think, yes, we shouldn't overestimate
[Amit Varma]: the short term, as Akshay, you pointed out. And as you pointed out, we should not underestimate
[Amit Varma]: the long term either. A couple of sort of final questions before we kind of
[Amit Varma]: wrap it up, because whatever the, you know, the energy industry outside might be like,
[Amit Varma]: I worry that you guys are running out of energy.
[Amit Varma]: We're not that old.
[Amit Varma]: So one, I want to go to nuclear for a second, because the more I read about nuclear and think
[Amit Varma]: about it, it seems to me that that could be one kind of game changer, which just makes this whole
[Amit Varma]: question moot. I mean, we were talking about Michael Schellenberger's work before
[Amit Varma]: the recording, and I'll give suitable links. And there's also an excellent op-ed
[Amit Varma]: in the New York Times co-written by Steven Pinker a couple of years ago,
[Amit Varma]: which kind of spoke about that. Now, people think about nuclear and they say, oh shit,
[Amit Varma]: the dangers and all that. But those dangers are massively overstated in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: one of the things that Pinker and his co-writers pointed out in the op-ed was that if you look
[Amit Varma]: at the total number of people who died in Chernobyl, including the several thousand
[Amit Varma]: from cancer, that's the same number of people killed by coal emissions in one day, right?
[Amit Varma]: Nuclear energy is by far orders of magnitude safer than any other kind of energy. In fact,
[Amit Varma]: even Chernobyl was really caused by a dysfunctional bureaucracy. And nuclear energy is really sort of,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the safest kind of power generation that exists today, as in fact, France,
[Amit Varma]: where you're from Akshay, has kind of demonstrated and seems to be winning that argument with
[Amit Varma]: Germany, which we were talking about earlier. So what are your sort of thoughts on this?
[Guest 2]: Well, one, I think there are two sets of risks with nuclear. One is the one you mentioned,
[Guest 2]: which is the danger of fallout and having disasters. The second is the more unseen risk
[Guest 2]: of waste disposal. So there was a pretty good article recently, I think it was in the Financial
[Guest 2]: Times, I'll find it and send you the link for it so that people can read it. But it's an article
[Guest 2]: which talks about the dangers of storage of waste, of nuclear waste. There are caverns underneath
[Guest 2]: certain towns in France and in the desert in, you know, in the US, etc. That's a bigger problem.
[Guest 2]: But the way I look at it is this, and I might be accused for being slightly flippant or
[Guest 2]: technologically deterministic about it. But if we accept that climate change is an existential
[Guest 2]: problem today, then you shouldn't be ramping down on nuclear for sure. What Germany did,
[Guest 2]: I think was wrong, because it is today burning coal. It's burning more expensive gas and arguably
[Guest 2]: it's more, diplomatically it's more open to being arm twisted by Russia than it otherwise would
[Guest 2]: have been. So I'm saying kick that problem down the road. It's not generally recommended that you
[Guest 2]: do that, but kick that down the road, sort out the climate change issue, and then figure out
[Guest 2]: what you're going to do about that. That's one. And secondly, there is promise with more small
[Guest 2]: scale nuclear. There's some promise with the holy grail of fusion. So we don't know how that will
[Guest 2]: go. But I think that we need to seriously consider it because the alternative is a little hard to
[Amit Varma]: contemplate, which is that we'll go up in smoke. And I just like to quote from that op-ed since
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned nuclear waste, where Pinker and his co-writers write, quote, nuclear waste is compact.
[Amit Varma]: America's total from 60 years would fit in a Walmart and is safely stored in concrete
[Amit Varma]: casts and pools becoming less radioactive over time. After we have solved the more pressing
[Amit Varma]: challenge of climate change, we can either burn the waste as fuel in new types of reactors or
[Amit Varma]: buried deep underground. It's a far easier environmental challenge than the world's
[Amit Varma]: enormous coal waste routinely dumped near poor communities and often laden with toxic arsenic,
[Amit Varma]: mercury and lead that can last forever. And the forever is an itals, which you know,
[Amit Varma]: NYT doesn't normally, I don't think newspapers use itals.
[Guest 1]: I want to worry about the behavior of real world states and political systems,
[Guest 1]: and about the bureaucratic competence that set the stage for Chernobyl. So I have the highest
[Guest 1]: respect for the engineering capabilities and the state capacity in Japan. Okay, and yet,
[Guest 1]: A, we got Fukushima, which was just a horrendous disaster.
[Amit Varma]: The tsunami killed people. The birds say the Fukushima leak didn't.
[Guest 1]: But then B, political systems respond to these things in ways that are less than rational. For
[Guest 1]: example, apparently, nuclear reactors were closed down all across Japan at the time of the Fukushima
[Guest 1]: crisis because people just panicked. And hundreds of people died of cold in that period because
[Guest 1]: energy supplies to households were cut off. Okay, so there is nuclear energy as an engineering
[Guest 1]: construct. And then there is the bureaucratic incompetence about how it is dealt with. And then
[Guest 1]: there is the knee jerk and extreme reactions of political systems to extreme threats. And under
[Guest 1]: the third category, I would put the decision by Germany to mothball the nuclear industry in
[Guest 1]: response to Fukushima. Under the third, I would put the less than sophisticated responses of large
[Guest 1]: numbers of countries to a threat like COVID-19. Governments, political systems don't fare well
[Guest 1]: when faced with risk and the concerns around nuclear energy lend themselves to panic and
[Guest 1]: the entire posturing of a political system that, oh, we are so great, we are on top of this.
[Guest 1]: And when you bring this kind of worldview to a place like India, I would worry even more
[Guest 1]: that Chernobyl bureaucratic incompetence, you know, it could happen here. Political system
[Guest 1]: overreacting, you know, it could happen here. So while I love and admire nuclear technology,
[Guest 1]: and there is a lot to be said for technological change, I'm a little nervous about how this could
[Amit Varma]: play out here. The thought just comes to mind that even if you solve for climate change, how will you
[Amit Varma]: solve for human idiocy? Maybe climate change is solving for human idiocy. Okay, a couple of final
[Amit Varma]: questions. My penultimate question is this, that you've come out with a paper. It's a great paper,
[Amit Varma]: everyone should read it. And obviously, the download link and everything will be in the show
[Amit Varma]: notes. Two part question, a two part penultimate question. So this is not the end, there is more
[Amit Varma]: after this. And the two part penultimate question is this, that one, where do you plan to now go
[Amit Varma]: with this ideas and this sort of body of thought that you guys are building? And two, if any of my
[Amit Varma]: listeners want to be part of this, if they're enthused by this, they want to be part of this
[Amit Varma]: in some way, maybe to research, maybe to fund, you know, what do they need to do?
[Guest 2]: Oh, wow. Thanks. Thanks for that. This is really the starting point. And as I said earlier on,
[Guest 2]: we are really still learning a lot in this process. We are still convinced with the power
[Guest 2]: of the intuitions that went into writing the paper. So there may be some tweaks to be made to
[Guest 2]: the way that we put out the solution. But what that all of that will require is a lot of research,
[Guest 2]: digging much deeper into each of the different topics of the chapters in our book,
[Guest 2]: in again, in our paper. And sure, if there are people who want to help in doing that, we'd be
[Guest 2]: more than, you know, delighted for that to happen. And we can provide some links for that. So what
[Guest 2]: we're going to do is that we're planning, you know, we're still in the sort of early stages
[Guest 2]: of figuring out exactly how we're going to do this. But there will be research, there will be
[Guest 2]: outputs of that research, there will be a lot of conversations with a lot of people who know more
[Guest 2]: than us about various different aspects of this process. And what we're going to try and do is
[Guest 2]: try and be a filter for both for ideas and people to come more into the public space so that this
[Guest 2]: debate becomes more mainstream. Climate change is never going to be an election issue in India,
[Guest 2]: not in the foreseeable future. But at least for the people who care about these kinds of issues,
[Guest 2]: it needs to be with a sharper focus on what the facts are, what the realities are,
[Guest 2]: and what the possibilities are. So there's going to be, as I said, research, there will be output
[Guest 2]: in the form of articles, there may be interviews and conversations that we have with thinkers on
[Guest 2]: the field. And then we'll try and distill those and come up with a sharper plan, and maybe with
[Guest 2]: more detail on how to sort of go from here to there. Would you like to add to that, Ajay?
[Guest 1]: Yeah, so we are dreaming that we will build a research program around this field. We recognize
[Guest 1]: that it's a vast and sprawling landscape. We hope to learn the field in great detail,
[Guest 1]: and then we hope to invent and create new knowledge that will help in thinking about
[Guest 1]: these things. We hope to build knowledge and build community. And we would love to have
[Guest 1]: interest and involvement from the people listening to this podcast. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I'm sure you'll help them find us. Yeah, I mean, you should give me some kind of
[Amit Varma]: contact link which I can put out there. So even people who want to fund you and not just volunteer
[Amit Varma]: for research purposes can do so. And it also strikes me that if you're listening to this,
[Amit Varma]: and you want to figure this shit out, as an intellectual challenges to understand all of this,
[Amit Varma]: I'd also say that in service of the Republic, your book and all the previous episodes you've done
[Amit Varma]: together are great, because it struck me that on a subject that I didn't know, I knew practically
[Amit Varma]: nothing about the energy sector, you took a framework, which I am kind of familiar with,
[Amit Varma]: and suddenly everything kind of made sense. And this framework is something that can be applied
[Amit Varma]: to so many things about the world and help us understand it better. So I think that that is
[Amit Varma]: a worthwhile journey to go on for his own sake. My final question to both of you would be that I
[Amit Varma]: offer in the show by asking my guests to recommend books that they want everyone to read. Like it
[Amit Varma]: doesn't have to be an all time favorite thing, it could be something you read recently, which struck
[Amit Varma]: you or a book that you're so excited about, you just want everyone to read it. So I'll start with
[Guest 1]: you, Ajay. Kim Stanley Robinson, climate science fiction. Okay.
[Guest 2]: Ajay Well, you know, I've got back to proper
[Guest 2]: reading or reading of other things than work related stuff after a long time. And I've dug
[Guest 2]: into all sorts of this. I didn't read fiction, Amit, for years. And I'm getting back to doing
[Guest 2]: that. And I'm really enjoying that. So when I travel somewhere, I like to pick up a book from
[Guest 2]: there. So recently, I picked up, we were in Lisbon, and I picked up this book called Death
[Guest 2]: by Interval, which is by Jose Saramago, you know, won the Nobel Prize and all of that. And it's
[Guest 2]: about, it's the premise of the book is fantastic. The first line, I think, is, the next day, no one
[Guest 2]: died. It's about a country where the next day no one dies and what the moral, ethical and fantastical
[Guest 2]: implications of that are. Then I started reading this series of mystery stories by Andrea Camilleri,
[Guest 2]: the Italian author, the Inspector Montalbano series, so Shape of Water, Terracotta Dog.
[Guest 2]: And frankly, I've given, I bought a stack of them. And my promise to myself is for every
[Guest 2]: two or three other books that I read, I'll allow myself to read this because this is like,
[Guest 2]: you know, it could be binge reading very, very easily. And I've got an addictive personality.
[Guest 2]: So you know, that would be a rabbit hole from which Ajay would have to come to Paris to pull
[Guest 2]: me out of. I also read a very interesting book called 21 Bites, very recently by Jeanette
[Guest 2]: Winterson, the author, which is actually a book on AI. So she read, I never know how to pronounce
[Guest 2]: his name, Ray Kurzweil, you know, singularities here. She read that book, and she got fascinated
[Guest 2]: with the whole idea of AI and then dug deep into it by reading about it for years, and then has
[Guest 2]: written a series of essays on it. And they're very well written. And I'd read other stuff on AI
[Guest 2]: before, but this is the first, the most accessible reading that I've done on it, done by an outsider
[Guest 2]: to the field. And actually, that's a bit of what we are doing. We're slight outsiders to our field,
[Guest 2]: and maybe that will give more clarity to people who aren't familiar with it. But I love that book.
[Guest 2]: And this year, I expect to follow through on some of these themes. But long term, one of my most
[Guest 2]: favorite books for a fairly non-religious person is Report to Greco by Nikos Kazantzakis about his
[Guest 2]: spiritual journey. And it's the most phenomenal spiritual journey type of book that I've read by,
[Guest 2]: again, a fantastic author. So that's one that leaps to mind. But the reason I'm talking about
[Guest 2]: recent ones is because there's so much reading you do over the years. And you wonder whether
[Guest 2]: you would go back and have the same view of the book today as you had then it was like amazing
[Guest 1]: and fantastic. And maybe today is not so much. My books are always contextual. It's about the
[Guest 1]: you at a certain point in time, the right book has to hit you at the right time.
[Guest 2]: And Seven Lessons in Physics by Carlo Rovelli, who's a professor at the University of Marseille.
[Guest 2]: And he wrote seven Sunday articles for an Italian newspaper on the biggest issues in physics and
[Guest 2]: even for a non-scientist like me, phenomenal reading.
[Amit Varma]: Lovely. I can't wait to read all these books. And if you like Andre Camilleri,
[Guest 2]: you should read Michael Dibdin. Have you read Michael Dibdin?
[Guest 2]: No, I haven't.
[Amit Varma]: Similar kind of writer, you'll love that also. You know, next time we meet,
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to ask you about your running because I know that's a big deal in your life. And in fact,
[Amit Varma]: Ajay was telling me earlier, you have to tell me if it's true, that during lockdown, when all the
[Amit Varma]: flights were shut, you wanted to come, but there were no flights. So you actually ran from Paris
[Guest 2]: to Delhi. Is that true?
[Guest 2]: No, but, well, you can, people can imagine whatever they want of that. But what I did
[Guest 2]: do in the lockdown, first lockdown in Delhi, and this is really bad citizenship. I ran every day,
[Guest 2]: I ran 100 days straight, because I was just if I and I would have gone mad if I didn't.
[Guest 2]: And I went out early and I made friends with the cops and the cops said,
[Guest 2]: nahi sir, bilkul bhaage, it's good for your health. So I've done all sorts of crazy things
[Guest 2]: to run, including, you know, back from coming back from Bombay at night and running from
[Guest 2]: Chanakya Puri to my house in the middle of the night to get my run in. So it is yeah,
[Guest 2]: that is a slightly more, you know, irrational area of my life. But yeah, I can't live without it.
[Amit Varma]: No, not irrational at all. You're inspirational now to me in more ways than one. So guys,
[Amit Varma]: thank you for coming on the show. This has been such a great conversation.
[Guest 1]: Thanks Amit. Always happy to be here. Great fun. We've gone for ages,
[Guest 2]: I never thought that I could, I would have lasted.
[Guest 2]: Thanks so much.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks.
[Amit Varma]: If so, would you like to support the production of the show? You can go over
[Amit Varma]: to seen unseen.in slash support and contribute any amount you like
[Amit Varma]: to keep this podcast alive and kicking. Thank you.